Electric Charges
Let us suspend a light body, say, a paper core, on a silk thread. Then we
rub a glass rod against a silk cloth and bring it close to the body. The core
will first be attracted to the rod but then, having touched it, will be repelled
against silk, remove the rod and place the cores at a small distance from
each other. They will repel each other (Fig. 2).
A paper core is repelled from the glass rod by which it has been charged.
Before we touched the cores with the glass rod rubbed against silk,
they had been in equilibrium in the vertical position under the action of
the force of gravity and tension of the thread. Now their equilibrium
position has changed. This means that in addition to the forces mention­
ed above, some other forces are acting on the cores. These forces differ
from the forces of gravity, the forces emerging as a result of deforma­
tions of bodies, friction and other forces which we have studied in the
course on mechanics. In the simple experiments described above, we en­
counter the manifestations of forces known as electric forces.
The bodies that exert electric forces on surrounding objects are referred
to as electrically charged bodies, and electric charges are said to be located
on such bodies.
Two paper cores suspended on silk threads and charged by a glass rod repel each other: mg is
the force of gravity acting on a paper core, F is the electric force and N is the force balancing
the tension of the thread.
In the above experiments, glass was charged by rubbing against silk.
We could take, however, sealing wax, ebonite, plexiglass, or amber instead
of glass and replace the silk cloth by leather, rubber or some other
material. Experiments show that any object can be electrically charged by
friction.
Electric repulsion of charged bodies is used in the construction of the
electroscope, an instrument for detecting electric charges. It consists of a
metal rod with a very thin aluminium or paper leaf (or two leaves) attached
to its end (Fig. 3a). The rod is fixed in a glass jar with the help of an
ebonite or amber stopper to protect the leaves from air currents. Figure 3b
shows a schematic diagram of an electroscope which we shall use
henceforth.
Let us touch the rod of an electroscope with an electrically charged
body, say, by a glass rod rubbed against silk. The leaves will be repelled by
A simple electroscope: (a) general and (b)
schematic diagram.
the rod and will diverge through a certain angle. If we now remove the rod,
the leaves will remain deflected, which indicates that a certain charge has
been transferred to the electroscope during its contact with the charged
body.
Let us charge the electroscope with the help of the glass rod, mark the
deflection of the leaves, touch the rod again with the charged glass and
then remove the glass rod. The leaves will be deviated by a larger angle. At
the third touch, the deviation will be still larger, and so on. This proves that
electric forces causing the deviation of the leaves can be stronger or
weaker, and hence the charge on the electroscope can be larger or smaller.
Thus, we can speak of the charge located on a body (like the electroscope in
our example) as a quantitative measure characterizing a certain natural
phenomenon.
In the experiments described above we demonstrated that we can impart an
electric charge to uncharged bodies by touching them with a charged body.
We used this process to charge an electroscope. Consequently, electric
charges can be transferred from one body to another.
Electric charges can also move across a body. For example, while
charging the electroscope, we touched with a glass rod the upper end of the
metallic rod of the electroscope. Nevertheless, the lower end of the rod, as
well as the leaves attached to it, turned out to be charged. This means that
charges moved along the rod.
However, electric charges move differently in different bodies. Let us
consider the following experiment. We arrange two electroscopes at a cer­
tain distance from each other, impart an electric charge to one of them and
connect the rods of the electroscopes by a piece of copper wire held with
the help of two silk threads (Fig. 4a). The deflection of the leaves of the
charged electroscope immediately becomes smaller, but at the same time
the leaves of the second electroscope are deflected, indicating the ap­
pearance of a charge. Electric charges easily move along the copper wire.
Let us now repeat this experiment with the silk thread instead of the
copper wire (Fig. 4b). We can now hold the ends of the thread just in
hands. It will be seen that in this case the charged electroscope preserves its
charge for a long time, while the other electroscope remains uncharged as
before. Electric charges cannot move along the silk thread. Carrying out
this experiment with an ordinary (white cotton) thread, we shall obtain an
intermediate result: the charge will be transferred from one electroscope to
the other, but at a very small rate.1
troscope to the other much faster since the black dye of the thread is a substance through
which a charge can move quite easily.
Chapter 1
Charge transfer through different bodies: (a) electric charges readily move along a metal wire;
when the electroscopes are connected by a wire, the charge of the left-hand electroscope
decreases while that of the right-hand electroscope increases; (b) electric charges do not pass
through a silk thread; when two electroscopes are connected by a silk thread, the left-hand
electroscope retains its charge, while the right-hand electroscope remains uncharged.
The substances through which electric charges can easily move are
referred to as conductors. The substances which do not possess this proper­
ty are known as insulators or dielectrics.
All metals, aqueous solutions of salts and acids and many other
substances are good conductors. Hot gases also have a high electrical con­
ductivity. If the flame of a candle is brought close to a charged elec­
troscope, the air surrounding the electroscope becomes a conductor, and
the charge from the electroscope leaks to surrounding bodies. This can be
seen from a rapid collapse of the electroscope leaves (Fig. 5).
The leaves of an electroscope rapidly collapse when a flame is
carefully brought to the rod of the electroscope.
A human body is also a conductor (though not a very good one). If we
touch a charged electroscope, it is discharged, and the leaves collapse. In
this case, the charged electroscope is said to be “earthed” through our
body, the floor and walls of the room. In Sec. 2.16, we shall consider this
process in detail.
The examples of good insulators are amber, porcelain, glass, ebonite,
rubber, silk and gases at room temperature. It should be noted that many
solid insulators such as glass provide a good insulation only in dry air and
become poor insulators when the air humidity is high. This is due to the
fact that a conducting water film may be formed on the surface of an in­
sulator in humid air. This film can be removed by careful heating, after
which the insulating ability of the material is recovered.
When the displacement of charges occurs in a body, an electric current
is said to be flowing in it. For example, when two electroscopes are con­
the wire, which does not differ in principle from the current in an electric
circuit or in the cable of a tram.
Both conductors and insulators play an exceptionally important role in
modern applications of electricity. Metallic wires of transmission lines are
the “channels” along which electric charges are forced to move. It is very
important that at the sites where the wires are fixed the charges do not leak
from them to the surrounding objects. For this reason, they are always ar­
ranged on special holders (“insulators”) without which modern electric
transmission lines cannot exist.
It was mentioned above that glass does not conduct electricity. This state­
ment, however, should be accepted with reservations. Thorough observa­
tions show that electric charges can pass through glass as well as through
any other insulator. However, the charge that can pass through bodies
Chapter 1
known as insulators during a certain time (other conditions being equal) is
much smaller than the charge passing through a conductor of the same
shape and size. When a substance is said to be an insulator this only means
that in the given case the charges passing through it can be neglected.
For example, in spite of the fact that amber is the best of known in­
sulators, a certain amount of electricity still passes through it. However,
the charge that passes through the stopper during the time of the experi­
ment is always negligibly small in comparison with the total charge of the
electroscope, and therefore amber is an appropriate insulator for the elec­
troscope. The situation would be quite different if we took an electroscope
with porcelain insulation. The charges leaking through the porcelain stop­
per during the experiment would be comparable with the charge of the elec­
troscope, and it would be seen that the leaves of the electroscope collapse
periment. However, porcelain turns out to be an excellent insulator for
technical purposes since the charge passing through it in a certain time is
in the same time. Consequently, the division o f materials into conductors
and insulators is conventional. It may even happen that the same material
should be treated as an insulator in some cases and as a conductor in
others.
Until the recent past, either metals which conduct electric current very
easily, or insulators (such as porcelain, glass, ebonite and amber) were
mainly used in electrical engineering. Metals were used for manufacturing
wires, while insulators were used for producing holders to prevent the
charge from leaking through the wires. However, the overwhelming ma­
jority of substances in nature do not belong to any of these groups. These
substances are called semiconductors, which means that according to their
properties, they occupy an intermediate position between very good con­
ductors and very good insulators. For this reason, they are not suitable for
manufacturing either wires or insulating holders. In recent decades,
however, many peculiar properties of semiconductors have been observed
and analyzed, which led to several extremely important and promising ap­
plications of these materials in various branches of science and technology.
Semiconductors will be considered in greater detail in Chap. 9.
Insulating properties of a substance are also determined by its state and
may change significantly. Figure 6 represents an experiment showing that
glass completely loses its insulating properties at high temperatures. Let us
cut one of the wires leading to an electric bulb, remove the insulation and
connect the terminals to a glass rod. If we close the circuit, the bulb will not
glow since glass is a sufficiently good insulator at room temperature. If,
however, we heat the glass rod with the help of a burner, the bulb starts to
As a result of heating, glass becomes a conductor, and the bulb begins to glow.
glow. Thus, electric current can pass through the heated glass rod. Here we
can observe one more phenomenon. Passing through the glass rod, the
electric current itself heats it, the heating being the stronger the larger the
current. Therefore, if we take a sufficiently powerful bulb, i.e. such that a
strong electric current can pass through it, this current will heat the glass
rod considerably. Then the burner can be removed, and the glass will re­
main hot and conduct well. The heating of the glass rod will continue to in­
crease, and ultimately the glass will melt.
Let us charge a light paper core suspended on a silk thread with the help of
a glass rod rubbed against silk and bring to it a piece of sealing wax charged
by rubbing against wool. The core will be attracted by the sealing wax
repelled by the glass rod by which it has been charged. This indicates that
the charges emerging on glass and sealing wax are qualitatively different.
The following experiment proves this still more visually. Let us charge
two identical electroscopes with the help of a glass rod and connect their
rods by a metal wire fastened to an insulating handle. If the electroscopes
are quite identical, their leaves will be deflected through the same angle, in­
dicating that the total charge is distributed equally between the two elec­
troscopes. Let us now charge one electroscope with the help of glass and
the other with the help of sealing wax so that their leaves are deflected by
the same angle, and connect them again (Fig. 8). The leaves of both elec­
troscopes will collapse, indicating that the electroscopes are not charged
any longer. This means that when taken in equal amounts, the charges of
the glass and sealing wax neutralize (or compensate) each other.
Chapter 1
Two identical electroscopes charged by unlike charges
and connected by a conductor are discharged; no charge
is obtained when two equal unlike charges are con­
By using other charged bodies in these experiments, we discover that
some of them act as charged glass, i.e. they are repelled from the charges of
glass and are attracted by the charges of sealing wax, while others behave
as charged sealing wax, i.e. they are attracted by the charges of glass and
are repelled from the charges of sealing wax. Despite the vast number of
different substances in nature, there exist only two different types of elec­
tric charges.
It was shown above that the charges of glass and sealing wax can
signs to quantities which are decreased as a result of addition. Therefore,
by convention electric charges are also ascribed different signs, viz. positive
and negative (Fig. 8).
Positively charged bodies are those which act on other charged bodies
like glass electrically charged by rubbing against silk. Negatively charged
bodies are those which act in the same way as sealing wax electrically
charged by rubbing against wool. The above experiments show that like
charges repel and unlike charges attract each other. 2
The terms “positive” and “negative” for charges emerging on glass and sealing wax
were chosen arbitrarily.
How will the deflection of the electroscope leaves change?
make this experiment after insulating the rod from the hand by wrapping it in rubber,
electric charges will appear on it. Explain the difference in the results of these ex­
periments.
charged glass rod?
a piece of fur in your hand and strike it repeatedly against a wooden table. Your mate
can observe a spark from your body by bringing his hand close to it. Explain the pro­
cesses occurring in this experiment.
We have not considered so far what happens to a body on which electric
charges are generated. Let us now consider this question in greater detail.
We shall first show that in charging by friction, both bodies get elec­
trically charged. For this purpose, we attach insulating handles to a plate
made of ebonite and to another plate made of wood and covered by a
woolen cloth. To determine the electric charge on the plates more accurate­
ly, we fix to an electroscope a metallic cylinder (Fig. 9) and lower the plates
cloth have opposite charges. As they are introduced into the
cylinder of an electroscope, its leaves remain collapsed. (6) If
one of the plates is removed, the electroscope leaves diverge.
into it instead of simply touching the electroscope rod by them. It will be
shown in Sec. 2.20 that if a charged body is introduced into a closed con2*
Chapter 1
ducting shell, an exactly equal charge will appear on the outer surface of
the shell even if the charged body does not touch the shell. This remains
true for a cavity with a small opening like a long narrow cylinder.
Let us insert each plate into the cylinder. The leaves of the electroscope
do not deviate, which indicates that the two plates are initially uncharged.
We now rub the plates against each other and again introduce them
separately into the cylinder. The leaves of the electroscope will move apart
considerably as we introduce each plate, indicating that both ebonite and
woolen cloth have been electrically charged as a result of friction.
Let us introduce the two charged plates into the cylinder simultaneous­
ly. The leaves of the electroscope will not be deflected at all. If, however,
we remove one of the plates, keeping the other plate in the cylinder, the
electroscope leaves will be considerably deflected again, which means that
each plate remains charged. The fact that the electroscope does not indicate
any charge when both plates are introduced into the cylinder means that
the charges of the plates are exactly equal in magnitude and opposite in
sign so that the sum o f the charges o f the plates before and after charging is
equal to zero.
This important experiment leads to the conclusion that neither positive
already present on each plate before the experiment, but since their
amounts were equal, they could not be detected. Electric charging is re­
duced to a separation (in one way or another) of positive and negative
charges so that an excess of positive charges is created on one plate (woolen
cloth) and the same excess of negative charges appears on the other plate
positive and negative charges is, as before, equal to zero.
It will be shown in the following chapters that the identification of elec­
tric charging with separation of charges is indeed correct. We shall see that
electrons. All electrons have the same charge, equal in magnitude to the socalled elementary charge e> viz. the smallest charge existing in nature.3The
mass of an electron is very small and amounts to about 1/2000 of the mass
of a hydrogen atom. Therefore, a very large number of electrons can be
added to a body or taken away from it without a noticeable change in its
mass.
It is well known at present that every atom contains a certain number of
electrons. In the equilibrium state, an atom is uncharged since it also con­
tains a positive core, viz. the atomic nucleus which is the essential part of
any atom. The sum of the negative charges of all the electrons in an atom is
exactly equal in magnitude to the positive charge of its nucleus (Fig. lta).
If, however, one or several electrons are removed from an atom in one
way or am)ther, it will have an excess positive charge; in other words, it will
be charged positively. The atom in such a state is known as a positive ion
Schematic diagram of (a) a neutral atom, (b) a positive ion, and (c) a negative ion.
ing is the transfer o f electrons or ions from one body to another. Clearly in
the process of charging of a body, a charge of the same magnitude and of
opposite sign appears on the other body. This is just what was observed in
the above experiments.
The theory that attributes the electric properties of bodies to the presence
of electrons in them and to their motion is known as the electron theory.
This theory interprets many physical phenomena in a simple and visual
way. For this reason, it is expedient to introduce electron concepts at the
very outset of the study of electricity. Let us analyze some of the ex­
periments described above from this point of view.
It was shown in Sec. 1.2 that charges in metals and other conductors
can easily pass from one body to another. This means that electric particles
can move freely in conductors. Conversely, a body in which electric par­
ticles can freely move should be a good conductor. On the contrary, from
the fact that glass is a poor conductor of electricity we may conclude that
the motion of electric particles from one region to another inside glass (and
other insulators) is hampered. In highly conducting solutions (like that of
common salt), positive and negative charges can easily move. In metals,
however, ions do not move, and the only carriers of charge in metals are
electrons. The electrons moving freely over a metal are called free electrons
or conduction electrons.
When we charge a body, we create on it either an excess or a deficiency
of electrons in comparison with their normal number in an uncharged
Chapter 1
body. If in this case the electrons are borrowed from some other body or
removed from a body, they are neither created nor destroyed. Thus, charg­
ing and discharging of bodies are reduced to a redistribution of electrons
without any change in their total number.
It is known that when a charged conductor is connected to an
uncharged one, the charge is distributed between the two bodies. From the
point of view of the electron theory, this charge distribution takes place as
follows. If the first body is charged negatively, electrons are repelled by it
and move to the other body. If, however, the first body is charged positive­
ly, it attracts electrons from the second (neutral) body. In both cases, the
charge will decrease in the first body and increase in the second body until
equilibrium is established.
Finally, it was shown (Sec. 1.4) that positive and negative charges com­
pensate each other so that when equal and opposite charges are connected,
we obtain zero charge as a result. From the point of view of the electron
theory, this is obvious: by connecting two conductors one of which has the
same deficit of electrons as their excess in the other, we obtain the normal
more complex process whose details are not completely clear so far. In this
case, however, the problem is also reduced to the separation of charges
rather than their generation.
The main reason behind the phenomenon termed as charging by friction is
the passage of a fraction of electrons from one body to another as these
bodies come in a close contact (Fig. 11). As a result, a positive charge ap­
pears on the surface of the first body (deficiency of electrons) and a
displacement of electrons in this case is very small. It is of the order of in­
teratomic distances (~ 10“ 10 m).4 Therefore, the so-called double electric
layer emerging at the boundary of the two bodies is not manifested in any
way in the surrounding space. If, however, we move these bodies apart,
they will bear unlike charges on their surfaces (Fig. 12). This can be
verified by introducing each body into the cylinder of an electroscope
When we speak of “close contact” between two bodies, we mean that
the distance between the particles belonging to different bodies becomes
comparable with interatomic or intermolecular distances in a single body.
Emergence of a double elec­
tric layer in a contact of two
different bodies.
After the bodies are moved
apart, each of them turns
out to be charged.
It is only in these conditions that the “capture” of electrons of one body by
the other body is possible and a double electric layer is created. However,
the bodies we are dealing with are never perfectly smooth. For this reason,
even when we tightly press one body against the other, the close contact in
the above-mentioned sense takes place not over the entire surface but only
in small separate regions. When we rub one body against another, we in­
crease the number of such regions of close contact where charging takes
place, thus increasing the charge acquired by each body after their separa­
tion. This sums up the role of friction in charging. Charging by friction is a
term of only historical importance.
Experiments represented in Fig. 13 convince us that this is indeed so,
and that electric charges appear in close contact of different bodies even
when there is no friction between them in the proper sense of this word. We
take two electroscopes and fix long metal cylinders to their rods as shown
in Fig. 9. We pour distilled water in one cylinder and immerse in it a paraf­
fin ball attached to an insulating handle (Fig. 13a). Extracting this ball
from the water, we observe that the leaves of the electroscope move apart
whether we immerse the ball to a large or small depth, or whether it is ex­
tracted from water slowly or rapidly. This means that charges are separated
when the ball touches the liquid, and friction itself does not play any role
here. Inserting the ball into the cylinder of the second electroscope
apart, i.e. the ball has acquired an electric charge in contact with water. Let
us now connect the electroscopes through a wire (Fig. 13c). The leaves of
the two electroscopes collapse, which means that the charges acquired by
water and the ball are equal and opposite.
The separation of charges and the appearance of a double electric layer
take place during a contact of any two different bodies: insulators or con­
ductors, solids, liquids or gases. It will be shown below (Sec. 6.3) that this
Chapter 1
Electrostatic charging of water and a paraffin ball immersed in it.
fact is essential for explaining a number of important phenomena including
the operation of galvanic cells. Then why did we always take only good in­
sulators (amber, glass, silk, ebonite, etc.) for describing charging by fric­
tion? As a matter of fact, the charge in any insulator remains in the region
where it appears and cannot move over the entire surface or to other ob­
jects in contact with it. However, one of the bodies being rubbed could also
be a piece of metal attached to an insulating handle. But our experiments
would be a failure if both bodies rubbed against each other were metals
even if attached to insulating handles. The reason behind this is that the
bodies in question cannot be separated from each other over the entire sur­
face at once. Due to an inevitable coarseness of the surfaces, there will
always be some points of contact at the moment of separation, and since
electrons move freely in metals, all the excess electrons will flow through
these “bridges” between metals at the last moment, and the two pieces will
turn out to be electrically neutral.
sometimes hear a slight crackling, and in a dark room small sparks can be seen between
the hair and the comb).
palms. It sticks to the tiles. When an attempt is made to remove it, a crackling sound is
heard, and sparks can be observed between the paper and the fire-place in the dark. Ex­
plain the phenomenon. Why is it impossible to perform this experiment with a cold fire­
place? Recall what has been said in this connection in Sec. 1.2.
Charging by friction is not the only method of separating electrons and
positive ions. In this and the next sections, we shall consider two other
methods of separating charges and obtaining charges of either kind on
bodies.
Let us repeat the experiment on electroscope charging, described in
Sec. 1.1. We shall now watch attentively the very moment when the leaves
start to move apart. We shall see that this occurs even before a charged
body touches the rod of the instrument. This means that a conductor is
charged not only in contact with a charged body but also when it is at a cer­
tain distance from it. We shall consider this phenomenon in greater detail.
Let us suspend light paper strips from an insulated conductor (Fig. 14).
If the conductor is initially neutral, the strips hang loosely. Let us now
As a charged metallic ball is brought close,
the strips at points a and b diverge, which
indicates that charges are induced at these
points. The strips at points a ' and b ' do
these points.
bring near the conductor an insulated metallic ball strongly charged with
the help of, say, a glass rod. It can be seen that the strips suspended at the
ends of the body at points a and b move apart although the charged body
does not touch the conductor. The conductor has been charged by induc­
tion, and the phenomenon is thus called electrostatic charging by induc­
tion, or just electrostatic induction. The charges obtained by electrostatic
induction are known as induced charges. The strips suspended at the mid­
dle of the body at points a' and b ' do not move apart. This means that the
charges are induced only at the ends of the body while its middle remains
ed at points a and b , we see that the strips suspended at point b are repelled
by the rod while those at point a are attracted to it. Consequently, the
charge induced at the far end of the conductor has the same sign as that of
the ball, while in regions facing the ball the opposite charge is induced.
Having removed the charged ball, we see that the strips collapse. The same
phenomenon can be observed if we repeat the experiment with a negatively
charged ball (for example, with the help of sealing wax).
From the point of view of the electron theory, this phenomenon can
easily be explained by the presence of free electrons in the conductor. As
Chapter 1
we bring to it a positive charge, electrons are attracted to the charge and are
accumulated at the nearest end of the conductor. A certain number of “ex­
cess” electrons are accumulated on this part of the conductor and it turns
out to be charged negatively. At the far end, a deficit of electrons, and
hence an excess of ions, is created and a positive charge appears there.
When a negatively charged body is brought to a conductor, the elec­
trons are accumulated at the far end, while an excess of positive ions is
observed at the near end. After the charge causing the displacement of elec­
trons has been removed, they are again distributed over the conductor so
that all regions become neutral as before.
The movement of charges in the conductor and their accumulation at
the ends takes place until the excess charges at the ends of the conductor
balance electric forces from the charged ball, which cause the redistribu­
tion of electrons. The absence of a charge at the middle of the body in­
dicates that the forces exerted by the charged ball and those exerted on elec­
trons by excess charges accumulated at the ends are balanced.
Induced charges can be isolated on the appropriate parts of the conduc­
tor by dividing the conductor into parts in the presence of a charged body.
This experiment is shown in Fig. 15. In this case, the displaced electrons
The strips at points a, a', b, b ' re­
main diverged after the charged ball
has been removed.
cannot return back after the charged ball has been removed since the parts
of the conductor are separated by an insulator (air). The excess electrons
are distributed over the entire left-hand part. The deficiency of electrons at
point b is partially replenished from the region near point b '. Thus, each
part of the conductor is found to be charged: the left-hand part has a
charge opposite to that of the ball while the right-hand side has the charge
like that of the ball. The strips move apart not only at points a and b but
also at a ' and b \ where they were formerly undeflected.
This phenomenon is often used in practice for charging conductors. In
order to electrostatically charge an electroscope by this method, an ex­
perimenter can bring a charged rod made of sealing wax (bearing a negative
charge) close to it and touch the rod of the electroscope with a finger. A
The stages of charging a body by induction: (a) by bringing a negatively charged sealing-wax
rod to the rod of the electroscope, we induce on it a positive charge and a negative charge is in­
duced on its leaves; (b) keeping the sealing-wax rod close to the electroscope, the experimenter
touches the latter and transfers a part of the negative charge of the electroscope to the Earth
through his body; the electroscope’s leaves collapse; (c) when the finger and the sealing-wax
rod are removed, only the positive charge is left on the electroscope, which is then distributed
between the rod and the leaves.
Determination of the sign of an unknown charge. When a
like charge is brought close, the electroscope leaves diverge
to a still larger angle, while when an unlike charge is
brought close, the leaves collapse.
fraction of electrons repelled by the sealing-wax rod will go to earth
through his body, and a certain deficiency of electrons will be created on
the rod and leaves of the electroscope. If he now removes the finger and
takes away the sealing-wax rod, the electroscope will be charged positively
earth plays the role of the second part of the conductor.
It should be noted that electrostatic induction can be used for determin­
ing the charge sign of an electroscope. We bring to it a charged body of a
known sign, for example, a glass rod. The sign of the electroscope charge
can easily be determined by observing the behaviour of its leaves (Fig. 17).
electrons be displaced in this case?
Chapter 1
without touching it. How will the divergence of the leaves change? Explain the
phenomenon.
body approaches the electroscope, the divergence of its leaves decreases to zero. At a
closer approach, however, a divergence is observed again. What processes occur in this
case?
tracted to it. Why does this happen?
Conductors can be charged by light. Under the action of light, electrons
can escape from a conductor into the surrounding space, and as a result the
conductor acquires a positive charge. This phenomenon is called the
photoelectric effect.
conductors under the action of light. A metal (preferably zinc) plate purified from oxides is
fixed to the rod of a negatively charged electroscope. If its insulation is good enough, the ex­
cess electrons are retained on the electroscope for a long time, and its leaves remain in the
divergent position.
An experiment on photoelectric effect. An electric arc il­
luminates a negatively charged plate fixed to an elec­
troscope. Under the action of light, electrons are knock­
ed out of the plate, the negative charge of the elec­
troscope decreases, and its leaves collapse.
Let us now illuminate the zinc plate by an arc lamp of a projector. The leaves will im­
mediately collapse, which means that the zinc plate has lost its excess electrons. Under the ac­
tion of light, these electrons escape from the metal and fly apart in surrounding space as a
result of repulsion from the negatively charged plate. Let us now impart a positive charge to
the plate and repeat the experiment. We shall see that in this case light does not produce any
effect, and the electroscope leaves remain deflected. The released electrons cannot leave the
plate due to the strong attraction of the positive charge. On the other hand, positive charges
are not knocked out from the metal by light.
This result shows that the strengths of the bonds formed by positive and negative charges
with the metal are different. Only negative charges, viz. electrons, can be released by light.
If we make this experiment with a neutral plate, the leaves of a conventional electroscope
will not diverge. If, however, we use a much more sensitive instrument, it will indicate that
light has produced on the plate a small positive charge which soon attains its maximum value.
It is not difficult to explain why the electrostatic charging of the plate under the action of light
ceases. As soon as a certain number of electrons leave the plate which thus becomes positively
charged, further removal of electrons to the surrounding space becomes impossible as was ex­
plained above. In Vol. 3 of this book, photoelectric effect will be considered in greater detail.
At the moment, we shall confine ourselves to the conclusion that this method of electrostatic
charging also consists in the separation of electrons and positive charges which have already
existed in the body before it was illuminated.
For a deep understanding of electric phenomena, a quantitative law of in­
teraction of electric charges is required. In other words, we must find the
dependence of the force acting between charged bodies on the magnitude
of the charges and on the distance between them.
The interaction of charged bodies is expressed in the simplest form
when their size is small in comparison with the distance between them. We
refer to such charged bodies as point charges. Point charges can be realized
in experiments by electrostatically charging small bodies like balls.
The law of interaction of two point charges was established experimen­
tally in 1785 by the French physicist Charles Coulomb (1736-1806). Figure
Coulomb’s torsion balance: (a) general view; (ft)
the head of the device and (c) the conductor for
imparting a charge to the ball.
Chapter 1
A light insulating rod 2 is suspended at the middle by a thin elastic string 1.
A conducting ball 3 is fixed to one end of the rod, while the disc 4 fixed at
the other end of the rod serves as a counterbalance and damper. The upper
end of the string is fixed to a rotating head whose torsion angle can be ac­
curately measured. Inside the device, an identical ball 5 is fixed on an in­
sulating rod 6. All these parts are enclosed in a large glass cylinder which
protects the rod from air currents. The scale engraved on the surface of the
cylinder makes it possible to determine the distance between balls 3 and 5 in
various positions.
The head of the instrument is shown separately in Fig. 19b. In
preliminary experiments, the torque (see Vol. 1) required for the torsion of
the string through a certain angle is determined. Knowing the length of the
rod, we can calculate the force which must be applied to ball 3 to create
such a torque.
In Coulomb’s experiments, a small conductor, which ^ a s just an or­
dinary pin with a large head stuck into a sealing-wax rod, was elec­
trostatically charged. This pin was introduced into the instrument through
the opening and brought in contact with a ball which, in turn, touched the
other ball. After the pin was removed, the two balls had the same charge
and repelled each other through a certain distance which was measured by
marking the corresponding division on the scale. By rotating the pointer of
the head in the direction indicated by the arrow, the string was twisted, and
the distances between the balls at different torsion angles were marked.
The law of repulsion was obtained by comparing different values of torsion
force with the corresponding distances between the balls.
Proceeding in this way, Coulomb succeeded in solving the first part of
the problem: he established the law governing the dependence of elec­
trostatic interaction on the distance between the bodies. It turned out that
the repulsive force o f two small like-charged balls is inversely proportional
to the square o f their center-to-center distance.5 If we denote the repulsive
force by F and the separation between the balls by r, this result can be
represented analytically a s F oc 1/ r 2 (the symbol oc indicates proportionali­
ty). The same results were obtained for unlike charges, the only difference
being that attraction is observed in this case.
A more difficult problem was to determine the effect of the magnitude
of charges on the force of interaction since no method of measuring
charges was known at that time. However, the experimenter could proceed
as follows: impart like charges q x and q2 (so far unknown) to the balls, ar5 This law was established as early as in 1771 by the English physicist H. Cavendish
range the balls at a certain distance and measure the torsion angle of the
string, then touch, say, the first ball by an identical third ball and remove
it. When two identical balls come into contact, the charge is distributed
equally between them so that the charge q x/2 will remain on the ball that
has been touched. Now it is possible to observe the interaction of charges
q x/2 and q2. In this way, the charge of any ball can be reduced by half and
the corresponding forces of interaction measured.
Similar experiments led Coulomb to establishing the following law.
The force o f interaction between two point charges acts along the
straight line between them, is proportional to the product o f their
magnitudes, and is inversely proportional to the square o f the distance be­
tween them.
Denoting by k the proportionality factor, we can write Coulomb’s law
in the form 6*
Coulomb’s law is similar in form to the law of universal gravitation (see
Vol. 1), but the role of masses is now played by electric charges.
The unit of charge in the International System of Units (SI) is a coulomb
ampere (A) (Sec. 3.4).
A charge o f one coulomb is defined as the charge passing per second
through the cross section o f a conductor carrying a direct current o f one
ampere. Accordingly, a coulomb is also called an ampere-second (A* s).
It was established experimentally that if charge is expressed in
coulombs, distance in metres and force in newtons, the proportionality fac­
tor k in formula (1.10.1) turns out to be equal to 9 x 109 N • m2/C 2:
F = 9 x 109 r
Hence it follows that a coulomb is a charge which exerts a force of 9 x 109
N on an identical charge separated from it in vacuum by a distance of 1 m.
In order to get rid of the factor 4ir appearing in most widely used for­
mulas in electrical engineering, the proportionality factor is written in the
charges in vacuum. If the space between the charges is filled by some insulator, say, alcohol or
kerosene, another quantity depending on the nature of the insulator appears in formula
form A: = l/4we0:
F ___ 1 Q\Qi
Other formulas are changed accordingly. Such a form of presenting for­
mulas is called rationalized.
The quantity e0 is known as the electric constant. It follows from a com­
parison of formulas (1.11.1) and (1.11.2) that
= 9 x 109 N • m2/C 2,
whence
e0 = _ _ J _ _ c 2/(N • m2) = 0.885 x 10"11 C2/(N - m2). (1.11.3)
It will be shown below (Sec. 2.23) that the unit of measurement of the
quantity e0 is called “farad per metre” , where farad (F) is the unit of
capacitance. Consequently, we can write
e0 = - ------- ----- -q F/m = 0.885 x 1 0 -n F/m.
a distance of 0.3 m from each other?
ing the same charge is suspended at the same height at a certain distance from the first
ball (Fig. 20). As a result of mutual repulsion, the balls diverge apart by 10 cm. By what
angle are their threads declined from the vertical? The mass of each ball is 0.1 g.
To Exercise 1.11.2.
charged. As a result, they are deflected from the vertical by an angle of 5.7°. The length
of the threads is 1 m, the mass of each ball is 1 g. What is the charge on each ball?
water contained in one litre an electron has been tom off and all the electrons are removed
from the ions to a distance equal to that between the poles of the Earth, i.e. 12 800 km.
What would be the force of attraction between these charges? Recall that the number of
molecules in a mole of a substance is 6.02 x 1023.
ii. What must be the frequency of rotation of the electron around the nucleus so that it
does not fall onto the nucleus if its orbit is a circle of radius 3 x 10“ 10 m? The electron
mass is 0.91 x 10“ 30 kg.
Electric Field
gp Coulomb’s law indicates that the force of electric interaction is observed
only between two (or more) charged bodies. Indeed, if we put q2 = 0 in
formula (1.10.1), F = 0 for all values of q x. It is known, however, that a
charged body (say, a sealing wax rod charged by friction) is able to attract
uncharged bodies like pieces of paper (Fig. 21) or metal foil.
Attraction of uncharged pieces of paper
to a charged sealing-wax rod.
A charged body rotates an uncharged
pointer made of a metal or paper.
Let us attach a paper or a metallic arrow to a pin fixed on an insulating
support so that the arrow can freely rotate on the pin point. If we place a
charged body near this arrow, the latter will turn so that its longitudinal
axis is directed towards the charged body (Fig. 22). Turning the arrow by
hand and releasing it again, we see that it returns to the former position. Ir­
respective of the end of the arrow facing the charged body, the arrow axis
In order to explain these interactions between charged and uncharged
bodies, we must turn to electric induction (Sec. 1.8) and Coulomb’s law
charged by induction when placed near a charged body, and as a result
charges existing in a body are redistributed so that excess charges of one
sign are accumulated in one part of the body, while charges of opposite
sign are accumulated in another part (Figs. 23 and 24).
Explanation of the attraction of neutral
pieces of paper by charged sealing wax.
Explanation of the action of a charged body on a
As was mentioned above, the charges opposite to those of the charged
body are found to be closer to the body inducing them, while like charges
are accumulated in excess at the far end. The interaction of the charge of
the body with induced charges is governed by Coulomb’s law. Therefore, a
body with induced charges is simultaneously attracted and repelled by a
charged body. However, the repulsion occurs between charges separated
by a larger distance and hence it is weaker than the attraction. As a result,
“neutral” bodies rotate and are attracted by a charged body, just as it is
observed in experiments.
Bring a charged rod close to a small wad of cotton resting on a glass plate and then
to an identical wad of cotton lying on a wooden table. Why is the wad of cotton attracted
more strongly to the rod in the latter case than in the former one? Pay attention to the
fact that wood is much better conductor than glass.
The action of a charged body on surrounding bodies is manifested* in the
form of attractive or repulsive forces which tend to rotate or displace these
bodies relative to the charged body. The manifestation of these forces was
observed in the experiments described in the previous sections. There is one
more instructive experiment that will be described now.
Let us pour a liquid insulator (say, oil) containing a granular solid1into
a small glass cuvette (Fig. 25). We place into the cuvette two metallic plates*oil.
oil. Chapter 2
■\ S' w" i "Vi"//,
Schematic diagram of the experimental set-up for obtaining electric field patterns: 1 — cuvette
containing castor oil with quinine crystals, 2 — conductors connected to a Wimshurst
machine and producing an electric field, 3 — light source, and 4 — screen on which the
shadow of the crystals is projected.
connected to a Wimshurst machine which makes it possible to continuously
separate positive and negative charges. To make the observation of grains
suspended in oil more convenient, we project the image of the entire pat­
tern on a screen or just observe the shadow of the cuvette on the ceiling
individual grains which are initially arranged at randon turn and are
displaced so that they are ultimately arranged in the form of chains be­
tween the electrodes. Figures 26 and 27 show the arrangement of grains be­
tween two parallel metallic plates and two metallic balls, respectively.
In this experiment, each grain is similar to a small arrow. Small size of
grains makes it possible to arrange them simultaneously at many points of
the medium and thus observe that the action of a charged body is
manifested at all points of the space surrounding the charge. Consequent­
ly, the presence of an electric charge in a certain region can be detected by
the effect produced by it at various points of the surrounding space.
The action of a charge at various points in space depends on its
magnitude and on the shape of the charged body. Therefore, in order to
characterize the action of a charge completely, we must know its action at
all points of the surrounding space. In other words, we must know the elec­
tric field produced by the charge. Thus, by “electric field” we mean the
space in which the effect o f an electric charge is manifested.
If we have several charges located at different points, the combined ef­
fect of these charges, or the field produced by all these charges, will be
manifested at any point of the surrounding space.
Arrangement of grains between two
parallel plates bearing unlike charges.
Arrangement of grains between two
metal balls bearing unlike charges.
It should be noted that when a study of electricity is undertaken, one is
often tempted to “interpret” the electric field, viz. to reduce it to some
other familiar phenomenon (like we reduced thermal phenomena to the
random motion of atoms and molecules). However, numerous attempts of
this kind in the field of electricity proved to be fruitless. Therefore, the
electric field should be treated as an independent physical reality which
cannot be reduced to thermal or mechanical phenomena. Electric
phenomena form a new class of natural phenomena which will be analyzed
by us with the help of experiments. Thus, our task is to investigate the
properties of electric field and the laws governing electric phenomena.
order to characterize electric field quantitatively, we could use any action
produced by it. For instance, optical properties of some substances
for a quantitative estimation of an electric field. Normally, however, the
mechanical effects produced by electric field on charged bodies are
employed for this purpose.
Let us suppose that an electric field is produced by a charge q . We in­
troduce a “test charge” q0 into the field and measure the force F acting on
this charge. This can be done, for example, by imparting a test charge to a
light ball suspended on a silk thread (Fig. 28) and measuring the angle of
deflection of the ball. According to Coulomb’s law, this force is propor­
tional to the test charge q0. Increasing the charge by a factor of two, three,
and in general n times, we observe a corresponding increase in the force (by
a factor of 2, 3 or ri). Therefore, the ratio F / q 0 does not depend any longer
on the magnitude of the test charge q0 and characterizes only the electric
Chapter 2
Investigation of electric field with the help of a test charge. The field strength decreases with
increasing distance.
field at the point where the test charge is located. The same is true for any
other electric field and not only for that produced by a charged ball.
The ratio F / q 0, which is equal to the force acting on a unit charge, is
taken as a quantitative measure of field and is called the electric field
strength. The field created by a system of charges instead of a single charge
q will be characterized in a similar way. Thus, the electricfield strength at a
given point o f space is the ratio o f the force acting on a charge placed at
this point to the magnitude o f this charge. Consequently, the electric field
strength is numerically equal to the force acting on a unit charge.
If we denote the electric field strength at a certain point by E, the charge
located at this point by q and the force acting on this charge by F, we can
write
E = F/q9
F = Eq.
whence
The field strength equal to unity is the strength of a field in which a unit
force acts on a unit charge. For example, the SI unit o f electric field
strength is the strength o f the field in which a force o f a newton acts on a
charge equal to a coulomb. This unit is known as volt per metre (V/m)
We defined electric field strength as a physical quantity numerically
equal to the force acting on a unit charge. Each force, however, is deter­
mined not only by its numerical value (magnitude) but also by the direc­
tion. Therefore, to characterize the electric field strength completely, we
must also indicate its direction. For the direction o f electric field strength
we take the direction o f the force acting on a positive charge. The electric
field strength at a certain point can be graphically represented as a directed
segment emerging from the given point just as it is done to represent a force
or any other vector quantity.
of 0.1 m from the centre of the ball?
charge?
If an electric field is produced by a single point charge q, its strength at a
point located at a distance r from this charge is, according to Coulomb’s
law, E =— *4ire0 r 2 ’
and is directed along the straight line connecting the charge with this point.
Thus, as we move away from a point charge, the strength of the field pro­
duced by it changes in inverse proportion to the squared distance. If the
charge q is positive, the field is directed along the radius away from the
charge, and if q is negative, the field has the radial direction towards the
charge (Fig. 29).
The strength of the field produced by a point charge at different points of space: (a) the field
strength due to a positive charge; (b) the field strength due to a negative charge.
Let us now determine the strength of the field produced by two point
charges q { and q2. Let E, be the field strength due to charge qi (in the
absence of charge q2) at a certain point a (Fig. 30), and E2 be the field
strength caused by charge q2 (when charge q xis removed) at the same point.
These quantities are determined by formula (2.4.1). Experiments show that
for the combined action of two charges, the field strength at point a can be
determined with the help of the parallelogram rule. If we plot at point a the
segments which represent the magnitudes and directions of the field
strengths E, and E2 and construct the parallelogram with these segments as
sides, the magnitude and direction of the strength E of the resultant field
Chapter 2
are represented by the diagonal of this parallelogram. The rule o f composi­
tion o f field strengths is similar to the rule o f composition o f forces in
mechanics. Just as in mechanics, the applicability of the parallelogram rule
implies the independence of action of electric fields (on the principle of in­
dependence of forces see Vol. 1).
Applying the parallelogram rule successively, we can calculate the
strength of the field created not only by two charges but also by any
In a similar way, it is possible to calculate the field strength due to large charged bodies.
For this purpose, we must mentally divide these bodies into small parts, and regarding each
part as a point charge, compose the field strengths due to these parts by the parallelogram
rule. However, the calculations may turn out to be cumbersome in this case.
It should be recalled that we have already encountered directional
quantities composed with the help of the parallelogram rule in Vol. 1
vectors. Thus, electric field strength is a vector quantity.
rp The distance between the second and third charges is 20 cm. While solving the problem,
make use of a pair of compasses and a ruler.
It goes without saying that electric field can exist not only in vacuum but
also in matter, since electric forces can act in various bodies as well. It
should be borne in mind, however, that there is a basic difference between
conductors and insulators. A conductor contains electric charges which can
move freely under the action of electric forces. On the other hand, no mo-
lion of electric charges can take place in an insulator under the effect of
electric forces. Therefore, if an electric field has been produced in a con­
ductor, free charges will start to move under the action of this field, i.e. an
electric current will flow in the conductor.
In Chap. 3, we shall discuss the conditions required for maintaining a
persistent electric current in a conductor. However, we do not observe such
currents in experiments on electrostatic charging of individual conductors,
i.e. after having performed certain displacements, charges in a conductor
attain the equilibrium state. Equilibrium is attained when the charges are
distributed over the conductor in such a way that the electric field produced
by them in the conductor just compensates the external field which has
caused the displacement of charges. Until such a compensation is com­
pleted, electric charges continue their motion in the conductor due to their
mobility. Thus, when charges are in equilibrium, the electric field strength
in a conductor is zero, i.e. there is no electric field in the conductor.
The presence of an electric field in an insulator does not disturb the
equilibrium of charges. The force exerted by the electric field on charges in
Ihe insulator is balanced by intramolecular forces keeping the charges
within an insulator molecule so that equilibrium of charges is possible in
the insulator in spite of the presence of the electric field. Naturally, as was
pointed out in Sec. 1.3, the division of bodies into conductors and in­
sulators is conventional. At a sufficiently high field strength a noticeable
displacement of charges can be observed in an insulator, which leads to its
breakdown. However, according to the generally accepted division into
conductors and insulators, we can say that when charges are in
equilibrium, there is no electric field in a conductor (say, metal), while elec­
tric field may exist in an insulator (like glass).
There exists a very convenient method of graphic description of electric
field. This method is reduced to the construction of a network of lines,
which depicts the magnitude and direction of the field strength at different
points in space.
Let us choose a point a in an electric field (Fig. 31a) and draw a small
rectilinear segment ab through it so that its direction coincides with the
direction of the field at the point a. Then we draw from the point b a seg­
ment be whose direction coincides with the direction of the field at the
point by and so on. We obtain an open polygon which indicates the direc­
tion of the field at its points a, by c, etc.
The open polygon constructed in this way does not indicate the direc­
tion of the field at all points exactly. Indeed, the segment ab is directed ex-
Chapter 2
indicating the direction of the field at six points, (c) The curve corresponding to the directTOn
of the field at all points. The dashed line shows the direction of the Held at point O.
actly along the field only at the point a (according to construction).
However, at some other point of this segment the field may have a
somewhat different direction. Our construction represents the direction of
the field the more accurately, the closer the chosen points to one another.
In Fig. 316, the direction of the field is determined at six points instead of
four and the pattern of the field is more accurate. The field representation
becomes quite accurate when the broken line points approach one another
indefinitely. In this case, the broken line is transformed into a smooth
curve ad (Fig. 31c). The direction of the tangent to this line at each point
coincides with the direction of the field strength at this point. For this
reason, the line is usually referred to as a field line 2. Thus, any line mental­
ly drawn in the field so that the direction o f the tangent to this line at any
point coincides with the direction o f the field strength at this point is called
an electric field line.
From the two opposite directions of a tangent, we shall agree to choose
the direction which coincides with that of the force acting on a positive
charge 3, and mark this direction by arrows.
In general, the electric field lines are curves. They can, however, be
straight lines also. Examples of electric fields represented by straight lines
are the field of a point charge isolated from other charges (Fig. 32), and the
field of a uniformly charged ball also isolated from other charged bodies
Using electric field lines, we can not only depict the direction of a field
but also the magnitude of its strength. Let us consider again the field of a
single point charge (Fig. 34). The lines of this field are radial straight lines
emerging from the charge in all directions. We construct a number of
spheres around the point of location of the charge q. All field lines drawn
old term is lines of force). — Eds.
point charge.
The field lines for the field of
a uniformly charged sphere.
Spheres drawn around a positive point charge q. A unit area element is isolated out
on each sphere.
by us pierce each of these spheres. Since the surface areas of these spheres
Increase in proportion to the squared radius, i.e. the square of the distance
from the charge, the number of lines passing through a unit surface area of
the spheres decreases in inverse proportion to the squared distance from
the charge. On the other hand, the electric field strength is also known to
decrease according to the same law. Therefore, in the example under con­
sideration, we can judge about the field strength from the number o f field
lines piercing a unit area o f the surface normal to these lines.
If the charge q were n times as large, the field strength at all points
would increase /?-fold. Therefore, in order to judge about the field strength
from the density of field lines, let us agree to draw more lines from a charge
with a larger magnitude. With such a method of field representation, the
Chapter 2
density of the field lines may serve as a quantitative description of the field.
We shall use the same method of field representation when the field is pro­
duced not by a single isolated charge but has a more complex configura­
tion.
Obviously, the number of lines drawn through a unit surface area for
representing the field of a given strength is arbitrary. It is only necessary
that the density of lines adopted for representing a field of unit strength
should also be retained for depicting different regions of the same field or
several fields being compared.
The field lines between two plates bearing unlike charges. The field strength is (a) minimum
In the figures (as in Fig. 35), we can show the cross section of the pat­
tern of spatial distribution of field lines by the plane of the figure rather
than the field line distribution in space. This allows us to obtain the socalled “electric field patterns” . Such patterns give a visual idea about the
spatial distribution of a given field. The lines are drawn densely in the
regions where the field strength is high, while their number is small in the
regions of weak fields.
A field whose strength is the same in magnitude and direction at all
points is known as a uniform field. The lines of a uniform field are parallel
straight lines. In the drawings, a uniform field is also represented by
parallel equidistant straight lines whose density is the higher, the stronger
the field represented by them (Fig. 35).
It should be noted that the chains formed by the grains in the experi­
ment described in Sec. 2.2 have the same shape as the field lines. It is
its location. Therefore, Figs. 26 and 27 resemble the electric field patterns
lor the field between parallel plates and around two charged balls respec­
tively. Using bodies of various shapes, we can easily obtain with the help of
similar experiments the patterns of distribution of electric field lines for
various fields.
While constructing electric field patterns, the following circumstances
should be taken into account.
be drawn through any point o f space.
at any point will have quite definite magnitude and direction. This means
that through any point we can draw a field line only in a definite direction,
i.e. a single line. In other words, electric field lines do not intersect.
diverge from a positive charge (the beginning of field lines) and converge at
a negative charge (the end of field lines). Electric field lines do not ter­
minate at any point other than an electric charge. They are directed from
positive to negative charges and can pass through insulators.
equilibrium, there are no electricfield lines in conductors. The electric field
lines do not pass through conductors; they start and terminate on their sur­
faces. Since electric charges are beginnings and ends of field lines, positive
charges are located on the surface from which electric field lines start,
while negative charges lie on the surfaces where the field lines terminate.
the field lines indicate the direction of forces acting on a charge. If they
were at an angle to the surface of a conductor, the force would have at the
surface a component along the surface. Then charges would be displaced
by this component along the surface. Equilibrium of charges is possible
only when the field lines are directed along the normal to the surface of a
given conductor.
Problems in Electrostatics
Using the rules formulated in the preceding section, we can solve a large
Chapter 2
draw from each charge a number of lines such that their density is
strength increases in proportion to the charge, the number of lines emerg­
ing from a charge must also be proportional to the charge. Therefore, we
draw the same number of field lines from equal charges. But the field lines
emerging from positive charges terminate at negative charges. Thus, all
lines emerging from positive charges will (fcve negative charges at their
ends, the total negative charge being equal tdrhe total positive charge. This
conclusion is in complete agreement with the observation (Sec. 1.5) that
electrostatic charging is the separation of equal positive and negative
charges.
Let us analyze the electrostatic induction with the help of field lines. Let
us suppose that an electric charge q (say, positive) is placed into a closed
Electrostatic induction in a closed shell: (a) a charge —q is induced on the inner surface, and
the charge q on the outer surface; (b) the charge q and the induced on the inner surface charge
- q are neutralized; the charge q remains on the outer surface.
metallic shell (Fig. 36a). A charge of opposite sign will be induced on the
surface of the shell facing the charge q. Since all field lines emerging from
the charge q must terminate on the inner surface of the shell (field lines do
magnitude to the inducing charge q. A positive induced charge equal in
magnitude to the negative charge - q induced on the inner surface of the
shell is distributed over its outer surface including the electroscope rod with
the leaves. If we make the introduced charge touch the inner surface of the
shell where the charge —q has been induced, these two equal and opposite
charges will be mutually neutralized, and the charge q will remain on the
outer surface of the cavity (Fig. 366).
Thus, we can easily explain the fact that when a charged body is in­
troduced into a metallic cavity, its charge is completely transferred to the
shell. At the same time, we can also explain the experiments (Sec. 1.5) with
a cavity connected to an electroscope and used to verify the equality of two
unlike charges formed by friction.
Electrostatic induction in an open cavity: (a) a fraction of field lines emerging from the charge
q does not reach the inner surface. The charge - q ' induced on this surface is smaller than the
charge q\ (b) the cavity is so deep and narrow that the charge - q is induced on the inner sur­
face, and the charge q , on the outer surface.
If the cavity into which the charge has been introduced were not closed
completely (Fig. 37cr), a fraction of field lines emerging from the charge q
could escape from the cavity and terminate on other bodies. Thus, not all
the lines emerging from the charge q would terminate on the inner surface
of the cavity, i.e. the negative charge —q ' induced on this surface would be
smaller than q in magnitude. Such an unclosed cavity is not a perfect in­
strument for the experiments described in Sec. 1.5. If, however, the open­
ing of the cavity is small and is at a considerable distance from the charge
q , practically all the lines terminate on the inner surface of the cavity, and
Chapter 2
it can be treated as closed (like a long narrow cylinder known as Faraday's
cylinder, Fig. 376).
ring?
paper flags are sometimes attached to the wires. When a line is alive, the flags turn
through a certain angle. Why does this occur?
when the cavity is preliminarily charged positively, and (a) a positive charge q or (b) a
Electric Field
Any charge in an electric field experiences the action of a force. Conse­
quently, a certain work is done when a charge moves in the field. This work
depends on the field strength at different points and on the charge displace­
ment. However, if a charge describes a closed curve, i.e. returns to the
original position, the work is equal to zero irrespective of the field con­
figuration and the shape of the path along which the charge has moved.
This very important property of electric field requires clarification. For
this purpose, we consider first the motion of a body in the gravity field. It
is well known (see Vol. 1) that work is equal to the product of the force by
the displacement and the cosine of the angle between them: A = Fs cos a.
If this angle is acute (a < 90°), the work is positive, while if the angle is
obtuse (a > 90°), the work is negative. In the former case, we obtain work
done by the force F, while in the latter case the work is done to overcome
this force. Let us suppose that a body moves in the gravitational field of the
Earth, i.e. in the space near the Earth’s surface where the gravitational
force of attraction to the Earth operates.
We assume that friction is absent in this displacement so that the state
of the body and its internal energy do not change: the body is not heated, is
undergo plastic deformation, and so on. Then any displacement of the
body in the gravitational field is accompanied only by a change in its poten­
tial and kinetic energy. If the body moves downwards, the potential energy
of the “Earth-body” system decreases, while the kinetic energy increases.
On the contrary, during the ascent of the body its potential energy in­
creases and the kinetic energy decreases. But the total mechanical energy,
viz. the sum of the potential and kinetic energies, remains unchanged (see
Vol. 1). However complex is the path of the body in the gravitational field
displacement in the horizontal direction), the Earth-body system returns to
the initial position and has the same energy as before if the body ultimately
returns to the original point, i.e. describes a closed trajectory. This means
that the sum of positive works done by the force of gravity in lowering the
body is equal in magnitude to the sum of negative works done by the force
of gravity on the segments of the path where the body ascends. Therefore,
the algebraic sum of all works done by the force of gravity on individual
segments of the trajectory, i.e. the total work over a closed path, is equal to
zero.
Thus it is clear that the above conclusion is valid only if the force of
gravity alone takes part in the process and there is no friction or any other
force causing the above-mentioned changes in the internal energy.
Therefore, gravitational forces, unlike many other forces such as friction,
possess the following property: the work done by gravitational forces dur­
ing the displacement o f a body over a closed path is equal to zero. It can
easily be seen that this property of gravitational forces is the manifestation
of the law of conservation of the total mechanical energy. In this connec­
tion, the force fields possessing this property are called conservative fields.
Like gravitational field, the electric field produced by electric charges at
rest is a conservative field. When a charge moves in this field, the work
done by the forces of the field is positive on the segments of the path where
the direction of displacement forms an acute angle with the direction of
force (like at point a in Fig. 38). On the contrary, the work done by the
forces of electric field is negative in the region where the displacement
forms an obtuse angle with the direction of force (at point b). When the
charge, having traversed a closed path, returns to the initial point, the total
work of electric forces over this path, which is equal to the algebraic sum of
positive works done on some segments and negative works done on other
segments, is zero.
A strict mathematical proof of the conservative nature of electric field is rather cumber­
some in the general case, and for this reason we shall confine ourselves to the proof of this
property of the field for a simple case of the field produced by a single point charge.
Let us suppose that a charge qQmoves over an arbitrary closed trajectory 1-2-3-4-5-6-1
cumventing the curve. In order to calculate the work done in this case, we mentally draw a
into small segments. Let us consider two segments l{ and l2 contained between the same
spheres (between points 2 and 3 and 5 and 6). If the segments l { and l2 are small enough, we
can assume that the force acting on the charge qQis constant at all points of these segments.
Since both segments are at equal distances from the charge q> then, according to Coulomb’s
law, the forces of interaction between the charges over the two segments are equal in
magnitude, but have different directions, which form different angles otj and ct2 with the
Chapter 2
direction of displacement. Finally, if lx and l2 are sufficiently small, they can be regarded as
segments of straight lines. Therefore, the work A 23 done by electric forces over the path 2-3 is
equal to the product of the force by the displacement and the cosine of the angle between the
force and the displacement:
A 2 2 — F7j cos of j .
Similarly, the work A 56 done over the segment 5-6 is
A 56 = FI2 cos a 2.
But cos a 2 = cos (180° - (3) = -c o s 0 so that A 56 = —Fl2 cos 0. Besides, it can be seen
from the figure that
/ j cos a , = l2 cos 0 = d,
where d is the separation between the spheres containing the segments /, and l2. Therefore, we
find that
^23 i.e. the algebraic sum of the works over the segments 2-3 and 5-6 is zero. The same result can
be obtained for any other pair of segments of the path contained between other spheres.
Therefore, the total work done in circumventing the closed path, which is equal to the sum of
the works on individual segments, will also be equal to zero.
We obtained this result for the electric field of a single point charge. It turns out to be
valid for any electrostatic field, i.e. the field produced by fixed charges, since the fields
created by any charge distribution can be reduced to the field of a system of point charges.
Thus, the work done in an electric field fo r displacing a charge over a
closed path is always equal to zero.*4
of fixed charges. — Eds.
Since the work done over the path 1-2-3-4-5-6-1 is equal to zero, this
means that the work done over the path 1-2-3-4 is equal in magnitude and
opposite in sign to the work done on the segment 4-5-6-1. But the work
done in displacing the charge over the path 4-5-6-1 is equal in magnitude
and opposite in sign to the work done in moving the charge in the opposite
direction, i.e. along the path 1-6-5-4. Hence it follows that the work on the
path 1-2-3-4 (Fig. 38) has the same magnitude and sign as the work done on
the segment 1-6-5-4. Since the chosen curvilinear contour is quite arbitrary,
the obtained result can also be expressed as follows: the work done by elec­
tric forces in moving a charge between two points in an electric field does
and final points.
Let us choose any two points 1 and 2 in an electric field (say, the field be­
tween a positively charged plate and a negatively charged ball, Fig. 39) and
transfer a positive charge q along an arbitrary path 1-3-2 from point 1 to
point 2. It is well known (see Sec. 2.9) that the work done by electric forces
in moving a charge does not depend on the shape of the path along which
the charge moves. Therefore, the work done over the path 1-3-2 will be the
same as on 1-4-2 and in general over any path connecting points 1 and 2.
Since the force acting on charge q is proportional to this charge (Sec. 2.3),
the work on every segment of the path, and hence the total work A , will
also be proportional to q . Therefore, for a given field the ratio A / q will
Chapter 2
have the same magnitude for all charges, and hence may serve as a
characteristic of the field. This quantity pl&s an important role in physics
and electrical engineering. It is called the difference o f electric potentials,
or voltage between points 1 and 2. Thus, the potential difference (or
voltage) between points 1 and 2 is the ratio o f the work done by electric
forces in displacing a charge from point 1 to point 2 to this charge.
If we denote the potential difference between points 1 and 2 by t / 12, the
work done by electric forces in moving the charge q from point 1 to point 2
will be expressed by the formula
A = qUX2.
The work A and the charge q in formula (2.10.1) can be either positive
or negative. Therefore, the potential difference UX2 is an algebraic quanti­
ty. It is positive when field forces do positive work by moving a positive
charge from point 1 to point 2 (or do negative work on a negative charge).
The potential difference Ux2 is negative if the field does negative work by
moving a positive charge from point 1 to point 2 (or does positive work on
a negative charge).
It follows from formula (2.10.1) that the magnitude and sign of the
potential difference UX2 coincide with the magnitude and sign of the work
done by the field forces on a unit positive charge moving from point 1 to
point 2. Obviously,
Ul 2= -C /21.
The SI unit of potential difference is the volt (V). According to (2.10.1),
a volt is the potential difference (voltage) between two points, such that
the displacement o f a positive charge o f one coulomb between these points
is associated with a work o f one joule done on this charge by the electric
field forces:
It follows from the definition of potential difference that (Fig. 39)
t /12 = t /13 + ^32>
t/i 3 = UX2 - U32 = Ul2 + U23.
While applying these relations, we must take care of signs. If, for example,
U13 = + 10 V and U32 = - 15 V, then Ux2 = - 5 V. U U X2 = + 5 V and
U23 = +7 V, then UX3 = 12 V, and so on.
The above arguments imply that a physical meaning can be attached
only to the potential difference (voltage) between any two points in an elec­
tric field since the work done in transporting charge in a field is defined
only when the initial and final points of the path are specified. Therefore,
when we speak of electric voltage, we always mean two points between
which this voltage exists. Whenever mention is made o f the voltage or
potential at any point, the potential difference between this point and some
other preset point is always meant.
Sometimes a certain point of the field from which the potential dif­
ference is measured for all other points is conditionally assigned the zero
potential, while any other point is assigned the potential equal to the poten­
tial difference between this point and the “zero” point. The attributing of a
certain “potential” to each point of the field is completely arbitrary. It is
similar to the condition used by geodesists leveling an area by assigning a
certain “altitude” to every point on the surface of the Earth and treating it
as the height above the sea level which is arbitrarily taken as the zero
reference point. However, it would be possible to measure altitudes not
from the sea level but from any other point, say, from the eastern peak of
the Elbrus. Then the sea level would correspond to an altitude of —5.4 km,
while the altitudes of all other points on the Earth would decrease by the
same amount. This, however, is of no importance since the real physical
meaning can be attached only to the difference in altitudes for two points,
which naturally remains unchanged.
Similarly, by choosing a different “zero” reference point for measuring
potential difference, we would obtain a different value of potential for a
point to which zero potential has been ascribed (say, + 100 V or —30 V).
All the values of “potential” at separate points of the field would also in­
crease by 100 V (or decrease by 30 V), but it would be immaterial since the
potential difference between any two points would remain unchanged, and
as has been streesed above, only the potential difference (voltage) between
two points has physical meaning.
Naturally, for convenience of measurements it is required that the
potential of a chosen point must remain unchanged. Otherwise, the values
of potentials for other points, measured relative to this point, cannot be
compared, and it would be difficult to employ this method for description
of fields. The situation would be as inconvenient as that of a leveler who
takes for zero altitude the altitude of a moving balloon.
The potential difference (voltage) of a field can be represented graphically
by lines in the same way as it was done in the case of field strength.
Let us imagine a surface such that the potential difference between each
pair of its points is equal to zero. Such a surface is called an equipotential
surface, or a surface of constant potential. The cross section of this surface
by the plane of the figure forms a certain equipotential line. According to
formula (2.10.1), the work done by electric forces in displacing a charge
Chapter 2
over such a surface (line) is equal to zero. This can be true only when the
direction of displacement is normal to the acting force. This means that at
any point, an equipotential surfaceiwormal to the electric field line. Con­
versely, any surface normal to the fiera lines at all points is an equipotential
surface since the displacement of a charge over this surface will not be
associated with the work done by electric forces, the force and displace­
ment being at right angles.
We can draw, instead of the equipotential surfaces, their section by the
plane of the figure, i.e. equipotential lines. They give a visual idea about
the variation of potential difference in a given field. It is convenient to
draw these lines so that the potential difference between any two
ference in the figure, we take an arbitrary equipotential line, mark it by
zero and write the figures 1, 2, 3, etc. at the remaining lines, indicating the
potential difference in volts between a given equipotential line and that
taken as the zero potential line. Here the choice of the zero line (zero sur­
face) is quite arbitrary since it is only the potential difference between any
two surfaces that has physical meaning (Sec. 2.10). Obviously, this dif­
ference does not depend on the choice of the zero surface.
Let us consider by way of example the field of a positive point charge.
In this case, the field lines are radial straight lines, while the equipotential
surfaces are concentric spheres normal to the field lines at any point.
Equipotential lines are concentric circles shown in Fig. 40a. While plotting
Equipotential surfaces of a point charge:
this pattern, an arbitrary circle was taken as the zero line, and then the
circles with the potential difference (relative to the zero circle) of 1, 2, 3,
etc. volts were constructed. Figure 40b shows equipotential lines con­
structed for a negative point charge.
In Sec. 2.10, a new quantity, viz. potential difference, was introduced.
What is this quantity intended for and what is its advantage?
Knowing the potential difference for all points of the field, i.e. having
found the pattern of equipotential surfaces, we can easily determine the
M M M
Construction of field lines from equipotential sur­
faces 1-5.
strength of this field. Indeed, let 7 ,2 ,5 ,4 and 5 (Fig. 41) be the equipoten­
tial surfaces. They are normal to the field lines at each point (Sec. 2.11)
and hence by drawing the lines L M perpendicular to the equipotential sur­
faces, we immediately obtain the field lines for the given field, i.e. deter­
mine the direction of the field at each point. The direction of lines L M in­
dicated in Fig. 41 corresponds to the case when the potential decreases
from surface 7 to surface 2, etc.5
In order to determine the field strength at a point a lying on the
equipotential surface 7-7, we mentally transfer a positive charge q from
this point along the field line to the neighbouring point b lying on the
equipotential surface 2-2. Let the potential difference between surfaces 7
and 2 be Un »and the length of the segment ab (viz. the separation of these
surfaces) be /. Then the work done by the electric forces in this displace­
ment is, according to formula (2.10.1), qU l2• On the other hand, this work
is equal to the product of the force F by the displacement /, i.e. FI, since the
directions of displacement and force coincide in this case. But according to
formula (2.3.1), F = qE. Therefore, the required work is
qEl = qUl29
whence
E = Un /l.
equipotential lines and field lines which lie in the plane of the figure. In order to completely
characterize the electric field in space, we should construct a spatial model, which, unfor­
tunately, is too difficult a task.
Chapter 2
If the electric field strength is different at different points of segment /, formula (2.12.1)
determines the mean strength of the field over segment /. In order to obtain the actual strength
at a given point, / should be made sufficiently small.
The quantity Ul2/ l is the potentialttifference between the ends of a
field line per unit length of the line. It cSi be seen that the field strength at
a certain point o f a field is equal to the voltage per unit length o f the field
line.
On the other hand, if equipotential surfaces are drawn at intervals of
is inversely proportional to the distance between two neighbouring
equipotential surfaces. In other words, the denser the equipotential sur­
faces, the greater the field strength in a given region.
It follows from formula (2.12.1) that for a field of unit strength, the
voltage per unit length is equal to unity. Accordingly, the SI unit of electric
field strength is called volt per metre (V/m).
Therefore, if we know the potential difference between any two points
of the field (or, as it is sometimes said, if we know the potential distribu­
tion of the field), we can also determine the field strength at each point, i.e.
determine the forces acting on charges in this field.
distance of 10 cm from each other. What force will act on a charge of 0.1 mC introduced
into the space between the plates?
and its strength is about 130 V/m. What force acts on a positve hydrogen ion near the
surface of the Earth and what is its direction? What is the ratio of this force to the force
of gravity acting on the ion? The mass of a hydrogen atom is 1.67 x 10“ 27 kg, and the
electron charge is 1.60 x 10“ 19 C.
According to formula (2.10.1),
A = qUn >
where A is the work done on a charge q as it moves from point 1 to point 2.
If the charge is positive, the sign of A coincides with that of Un . The work
A will be positive if the force acting on the charge is directed in the same
way as the displacement, i.e. from point 1 to point 2. If the charge q is
positive, the field strength will also have the same direction. On the other
hand, Un will be positive if the potential at point 2 is lower than that at
point 7. Hence we conclude that the electric field strength is directed
towards decreasing potential. Therefore, the field tends to displace a
positive charge towards decreasing potential and a negative charge,
towards increasing potential.
Thus, with the help of potential difference, one can characterize electric
field as completely as with the help of field strength. The system of
equipotential surfaces is the same “electric pattern” as that of field lines.
Knowing one of these patterns, it is possible, according to Sec. 2.11, to
construct the other pattern without any difficulty. As to the density of
equipotential surfaces, we can repeat the same arguments as in Sec. 2.6. If
the distribution of potential in the field is known, we can easily solve im­
portant problems involving electric field. In many cases, these problems
can be solved more easily with the help of potential distribution than with
the help of field lines.
It will be shown in Sec. 2.14 that potential difference can be experimen­
tally measured much more easily than the field strength. Therefore, the
description of a field with the help of potential difference is an important
and useful method.
Let us consider equilibrium conditions for charges in a conductor by using
the concept of potential difference. It has been mentioned in Sec. 2.5 that
when charges are in equilibrium, the field strength in a conductor must be
equal to zero (i.e. there is no electric field in the conductor). But according
to (2.12.1), this means that the potential difference between any points o f
the conductor is zero. This also refers to all points on the conductor sur­
face. Consequently, the surface o f a conductor is an equipotential surface.
Since the field lines are normal to all equipotential surfaces (Sec. 2.11),
they are perpendicular to the surface of the conductor (this conclusion has
been already drawn by us in Sec. 2.7).
To explanation of the emergence of motion of
charges in the presence of a potential difference.
If we have two isolated conductors 1 and 2 (Fig. 42), their surfaces
must be equipotential surfaces. However, there may exist a potential dif­
ference between the surfaces of these conductors. What will happen if we
connect these two conductors by a metallic wire? A potential difference
equal to that between the two conductors will be produced between the
ends of this wire. Consequently, an electric field will act along the wire,
resulting in the motion of free electrons in the direction of increasing
potential (Sec. 2.12), since the electrons bear a negative charge.
Chapter 2
Simultaneously, electrons will move in conductors 1 and 2, and as a result
the initial potential difference between the conductors will decrease. The
motion of electrons (viz. electric current) will exist in the conductors and
the wire connecting them until the potential ^fference between all points
of these conductors vanishes, and the surfaces of the two conductors and
the wire between them become a single equipotential surface.
Our globe as a whole is a conductor. Therefore, the surface of the Earth
is an equipotential surface. While constructing equipotential surfaces, the
surface coinciding with the surface of the Earth is often taken as the zero
potential surface. Then instead of “potential difference” , the term “poten­
tial” at a given point is used. In this case, one speaks of the potential dif­
ference between this point and any point on the surface of the Earth. It was
clarified in Sec. 2.11 that the choice of the Earth’s surface as the zero
equipotential surface is arbitrary.
charge placed above the surface of the Earth.
metallic sphere and the walls of the room containing the sphere.
metallic envelope coinciding with one of the equipotential surfaces?
Let us now see how the potential difference can be measured experimental­
ly. Figure 43 shows an instrument intended for this purpose. This is an or­
dinary electroscope with leaves, which now has a metallic shell and a scale
for measurements. We connect the shell of the instrument to the Earth and
touch its rod with a charged body. A fraction of charge will go over to the
rod, and the leaves will diverge through a certain angle. What determines
the angle of divergence?
When the leaves are charged, an electric field is produced inside the in­
strument. The lines of this field are shown in Fig. 44 as dashed lines, while
the equipotential surfaces are shown by solid lines. The surface of the
metallic shell is an equipotential surface (Sec. 2.13). The same applies to
the surface of the rod and the leaves, but naturally these are two different
equipotential surfaces. The potential difference between these surfaces cor­
responds to the field inside the instrument. Other equipotential surfaces are
arranged between these two. They are drawn across the same number of
field lines in Fig. 44. Therefore, the number of equipotential surfaces in
the figure depends on the potential difference between the leaves and the
shell. If this difference is large, the equipotential surfaces are drawn dense­
ly, and hence the potential drop per unit length is considerable. Conse-
An electrometer: (a) general view; K — terminal for leads connecting the metallic shell with
the Earth; (b) schematic diagram.
The electrostatic field in an electroscope with a metallic shell: (a) at a high potential difference
between the leaves and shell; (b) at a small potential difference between them.
quently, according to Sec. 2.12, the field strength around the leaves is also
high. If, on the contrary, the potential difference between the leaves and
shell is low, the potential drop is not large, and the field strength near the
leaves is small.
The divergence of the leaves depends on the force acting on them, i.e.
ultimately on the electric field strength near them. The higher the potential
difference, the larger the field strength near the leaves, and the larger the
angle of divergence. Creating the same potential difference between the
leaves and the shell, we shall observe the same divergence of the leaves.
Thus, the divergence of the leaves in a given instrument depends on the
potential difference between them and the instrument shell. Having sup-
Chapter 2
plied the instrument with a scale, we can determine the potential difference
from the divergence of the leaves.
The instruments for measuring potential diffeiwice are known as elec­
trometers. Figure 45 shows an electrometer. It caPbe graduated, i.e. we
can determine what potential difference in volts corresponds to various
angles of divergence. Then from the angle of divergence we can determine
straightaway the potential difference in volts. It follows from what has
been said above that an electrometer always measures the potential dif­
ference between its leaves and the shell.
Measurement of the potential difference between a conductor and the Earth with the help of
an electrometer (the first method).
In order to measure with an electrometer the potential difference be­
tween any two conductors, say, a conductor and the Earth (Fig. 45), we
must connect the rod (leaves) of the electrometer with this conductor and
its shell with the Earth. In a very short time, the electrometer rod will ac­
quire the same potential as the conductor connected to it, while the poten­
tial of the shell will become equal to the potential of the Earth (Sec. 2.16).
Thus, the readings of the electrometer give the potential difference between
the conductor and the Earth. Moving the end of the wire leading to the
Measurement of the potential difference between a conductor and the Earth with the help of
an electrometer (the second method).
electrometer over the surface of the conductor, we can see that the
divergence of the leaves does not change at all. This means that, according
to Sec. 2.13, the surface of a conductor is an equipotential surface ir­
respective of its configuration.
Naturally, we could proceed the other way round: connect the elec­
trometer rod to the Earth and the electrometer shell (which must be
thoroughly insulated, say, by placing the instrument on a paraffin plate) to
the conductor under investigation (Fig. 46).
In this case also the readings of the electrometer give the potential dif­
ference between its shell and rod, and hence the potential difference be­
tween the conductor and the Earth.
Electroscope?
By removing the metallic shell of an electrometer or replacing it by a glass
jar, we obtain a simple electroscope (Sec. 1.1). Now the electric field lines
emerging from charges will pass through the glass and terminate on sur­
rounding bodies, while the role of the shell will be played by the walls and
ceiling of the room, the body of an experimenter, and so on (Fig. 47). In
<b) Experiment with a charged electroscope: {a) the electric field lines around a charged elec­
troscope in a closed room; 0 ) when the electroscope is earthed the electric field arOund it
vanishes. The glass jar of the instrument is not shown for the sake of simplicity.
this case, the arrangement of equipotential surfaces around the leaves, and
hence the electric field lines, will depend on the arrangement of these
bodies, and for the same potential difference they can be quite different.
The divergence of the leaves will depend on the random arrangement of the
surrounding bodies, and therefore an electroscope is unsuitable for a
precise measurement of potential difference. A rigid metallic shell (with in­
variable shape) is an essential part of electrometer which distinguishes it
from electroscope.
divergence of its leaves becomes smaller. Explain the phenomenon.
The divergence of electroscope leaves essentially depends (as for an
electrometer) on the potential difference between the leaves and surround­
ing bodies). On the other hand, in all the experiments described above, an
electroscope was used for estimating charge. This, however, does not in­
volve any contradiction since the potential difference indicated above
depends on the charge imparted to the leaves. The larger this charge, the
higher the potential difference between the leaves and surrounding conduc­
tors, and the larger the angle of divergence of the leaves. Therefore, by
transferring a charge from a charged body to the electroscope, say, by plac­
ing this body in a metallic cylinder fixed to the electroscope (see Fig. 9), we
can judge about the charge of the body from the divergence of the leaves.
Obviously, the same applies to the electrometer. An electrometer can be
graduated not only for potential difference but also for charge in
coulombs.
It was mentioned in Sec. 1.1 that when the rod of a charged electroscope is
connected to the Earth, it is completely discharged, and its leaves collapse.
The same thing happens to any other conducting body: to be able to charge
a body, we must isolate it from the Earth. On the contrary, after a charged
conductor has been connected to the Earth, no electric effects are observed
in the space surrounding the conductor, i.e. it becomes neutral. We are
It was shown in the preceding section that the role of the shell in an elec­
troscope is played by the surrounding objects which are usually earthed,
viz. walls, ceiling, etc. (Fig. 47a). This means that the field lines originating
at the charged electroscope leaves terminate on conductors surrounding the
electroscope and connected to the Earth. When the electroscope is earthed
charges move between it and the Earth until the potential difference be­
tween the leaves and the Earth, and hence any of the earthed surrounding
bodies, becomes zero. Then the electric field pulling the leaves apart also
vanishes (Fig. 476), and they collapse. The same occurs during the earthing
of an electrometer whose shell is connected to the Earth (Fig. 45). If,
however, the shell is insulated (Fig. 46), the earthing of its rod does not
The same situation prevails when any body is earthed. We judge about
the charge of the body by the electric effects caused by it (like electric at­
traction or repulsion), i.e. by the electric field which exists around the
body. When a charged conductor is connected to the Earth, no electric ef­
fects are observed any longer since the potential difference between the
body and the Earth vanishes, and so does the strength of the surrounding
electric field. It is the vanishing of the electric field that is meant by the
statement that the body has been discharged. Naturally, the electric charge
itself does not vanish but is only redistributed between the body and the
Earth.
and insulate the electrometer from the Earth by putting it on a glass plate. Charge the
electrometer by touching it with a strongly charged ebonite rod. Will its leaves diverge?
electroscope?
change if we insulate the electrometer from the Earth and connect its shell with the con­
ductor and the rod with the Earth?
® q ®q © ‘ <77^7
“=■ /^ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ^X
©< j ©c V jm rT >J
-=- <d)
~= To Exercise 2.16.4.
positive charge is inserted in an earthed metallic box. All the bodies inside the box are
conductors.
Electric Probe
In order to measure the potential difference between an isolated metallic
conductor and the Earth, .it is sufficient to connect the rod of an elec­
trometer to the conductor through a wire and the shell with the Earth.
Then the electrometer leaves acquire the same potential as the conductor
since the free electrons in the metal will move until the potential difference
Chapter 2
between the electrometer rod and the conductor vanishes. Thus, the elec­
trometer indicating the potential difference between the rod and the shell
simultaneously shows the potential difference between the conductor under
investigation and the Earth.
The situation is more complicated when we have to measure the poten­
tial difference between any point in air and the Earth. By bringing the wire
from the electrometer rod to this point, we do not ensure the equalization
of the potential between this region in air and the rod, since under normal
conditions air contains no free charges that would move under the action
of the field until the potential difference between this region in air and the
wire leading to the electrometer becomes zero. In order to ensure such an
equalization of potentials, we must supply this region with free charges,
i.e. convert it into a conductor. This can be done by different methods, for
example, with the help of a flame. There is always a considerable number
of positive and negative ions in the flame which impart the properties of a
conductor to the air in contact with the flame. If the flame is small, ions are
supplied to the small region in air where the flame burns.
By holding the end of the wire leading to the electrometer rod in a small
flame, we can equalize the potential difference between the electrometer
rod and the region around the flame. Thus, we can measure the potential
difference between this region in air and the Earth. By placing the flame at
different points, we can “probe” the arrangement of equipotential surfaces
in air and in general investigate the distribution of potential in the electric
field in air. For this reason, such an instrument is called an electric detec­
tor, or probe (flame probe, Fig. 49). It is widely used for investigating elec­
tric field in air above the Earth’s surface.
What will an electrometer measure if its leaves are connected by a metallic wire
with the flame of a candle and the shell (insulated from the Earth) is connected by
another wire with the flame of another candle?
Experiments show that an electrometer connected to a probe shows noticeable divergence even
if there are no charged bodies near it. The divergence of its leaves is the larger, the higher the
point above the surface of the Earth. This means that there is a potential difference between
points in the atmosphere at different altitudes, i.e. there exists an electric field around the
Earth’s surface. The variation of potential with height is different in different seasons and for
different regions. Near the surface, its approximate value is about 130 V/m. As we rise above
the surface, this field rapidly attenuates, and at an altitude of 1 km its strength amounts to
only 40 V/m, while at an altitude of 10 km it becomes negligibly weak. The sign of this
change corresponds to the negative charge of the Earth. Thus, we always live and work in a
considerable electric field (See Ex. 2.18.1).
Experimental investigation of this field and appropriate calculations show that the Earth
as a whole has a negative charge whose mean value is estimated at 0.5 million coulombs. This
charge remains practically unchanged due to some processes in the Earth’s atmosphere and
beyond it (in space), which have not been studied completely so far.
A natural question arises: if a constant negative charge exists on the surface of the Earth,
then where are the corresponding positive charges? Where do the electric field lines ter­
minating at the Earth’s surface start? It can be easily seen that these positive charges cannot be
located very far from the Earth, for example, on the Moon, stars or planets. Otherwise, the
field near the Earth would have the same configuration as the field of an isolated ball in
Equipotential surfaces (solid lines) and field lines
objects. There is no field inside the ball like inside
any conductor.
distance from the centre of the Earth (and not from the Earth’s surface). However, the
Earth’s radius is equal to about 6400 km, and therefore the change in the distance by several
kilometres or tens of kilometres from the centre of the Earth would have caused only a negligi­
ble change in the electric field strength. However, experiments show that, as was mentioned
earlier, the strength of the Earth’s electric field decreases very rapidly as we move away from
it. This points to the fact that the positive charge corresponding to the negative charge of the
Earth is located at a not very large altitude above its surface. Indeed, a layer of positively
charged (ionized) molecules was observed at an altitude of a few tens of kilometres above the
Earth. The positive bulk charge of this “cloud” compensates the negative charge of the Earth.
The lines of the electric field of the Earth stretch from this layer to the surface of the Earth.
does not a person perceive this field, while a contact with the terminals of a battery or an
Chapter 2
electric circuit at a voltage of 220 V is rather painful and even dangerous?
potential with height near the surface of the Earth is 100 V/m on the average. Assuming
that the field is due to the charge of the Earth, calculate this charge considering that the
radius of the Earth is 6400 km.
Placing an electric probe at various points of a field, we can experimentally
study electric fields produced by charged bodies of any shape. Let us con­
sider some simple examples.
from other objects (for example, if it is placed on a high insulating support
or suspended on a long string), the readings of the electrometer in the ex­
periment represented in Fig. 49 will be the same when the probe is located
at points equidistant from the centre of the sphere. This means that the
equipotential surfaces in this case are concentric spheres. However, by
moving the probe in a radial direction, we observe a sharp change in poten­
tial. This means that we move along a field line. The equipotential surfaces
and field lines around a charged sphere are shown in Fig. 50. It should be
equipotential surfaces begin to lose their spherical shape and acquire a
more complex configuration. However, the experiment represented in
tial surfaces and field lines have the same configuration as for a point
charge located at the centre of the sphere (Fig. 40). A charged sphere
isolated from other objects produces in the surrounding space the same
field as if its charge were located at the centre.
and lines of the field between two plane parallel plates across which there is
Equipotential surfaces (solid lines) and field lines (dashed lines) between two parallel plates
bearing opposite charges.
a certain potential difference. It can be seen that the configuration of
cquipotential surfaces is quite complex. Between the plates, however, the
cquipotential surfaces do not differ from the planes parallel to the surfaces
of the plates, while the field lines are straight lines normal to the plates. If
the size of the plates is large in comparison with their separation, the field
between the plates (except in the regions near the edges of the plates) turns
out to be uniform, i.e. the field strength at different points has the same
magnitude and direction (Sec. 2.6).
It was shown in Sec. 2.12 that the field strength is equal to the potential
drop per unit length of a field line. Therefore, if we denote the distance be­
tween the plates by d and the potential difference by t/, the strength of the
field between the plates will be
E = U/d.
space between two horizontal capacitor plates charged to the potential difference of
the drop is 3.8 x 10"11 kg.
Coaxial cylinders. Before concluding this section, let us consider the
electric field emerging between two coaxial (having the same axis) cylinders
charged to a certain potential difference (Fig. 52a). In this case, the
equipotential surfaces in the middle (not very close to the edges of the
cylinder also have the configuration of coaxial cylinders, while at top and
bottom the cylinders are closed by dome-shaped surfaces (Fig. 52b).
bearing opposite charges: (at) section by a plane perpendicular to the cylinder axis; (b) section
by a plane passing through the axis of the cylinders.
Cutting the equipotential surfaces by a plane passing through the axis
of the cylinders, we obtain lines resembling the equipotential lines between
two charged plates (Fig. 51). In the middle of the cylinders (away from the
edges), these lines have the forrh of straight lines parallel to the axis of the
Chapter 2
cylinders. However, unlike the equipotential surfaces of a uniform field,
the equipotential lines in our case are not equidistant. They condense to the
inner cylinder and become less and less dense as we approach the outer
cylinder. This indicates that the field is nonuniform in the radial direction:
it is the strongest at the inner cylinder and gradually attenuates as we move
towards the outer cylinder. This is also illustrated in Fig. 52a. In the section
by the plane of the figure perpendicular to the cylinder axis, the equipoten­
tial surfaces give equipotential lines in the form of concentric circles. The
field lines, which are normal to all equipotential surfaces, are straight lines
directed along the radii of the cylinders. It can be seen that the lines are
denser at the surface of the inner cylinder, while the minimum density is
observed at the surface of the outer cylinder. This means that the field
strength attains its maximum value at the inner cylinder and gradually
decreases as we move away from its axis. This nonuniformity is the larger,
the smaller the diameter of the inner cylinder in comparison with the outer
cylinder.
Thus, a very strong field can be created around a thin filament. The
same effect is observed near pointed objects. The field in the vicinity of the
filament varies insignificantly if we change the size of the outer cylinder
and even its shape. In particular, the role of the outer cylinder can be
played by the walls of a room. The field near the filament will have the
same configuration as that depicted in Fig. 52. Filaments and points are
often used for creating a strong field in a certain region (for example, in the
so-called counters for charged particles).
equal and opposite charges, when the separation of the plates is (a) small, (b) large in
comparison with their size.
of a different shape is placed between the charged plates.
It was shown earlier that the surface of a conductor (both neutral and
charged) is an equipotential surface (Sec. 2.13) and the electric field
strength in a conductor is zero 6 (Sec. 2.5). The same applies to a hollow
conductor: its surface is also an equipotential surface, and the field in the
cavity is zero irrespective of the magnitude of the charge on the conductor
side the cavity).
This fact was visually demonstrated by the English physicist Michael
Faraday (1791-1861) who significantly enriched physics through a number
of brilliant discoveries. Faraday’s experiment consisted in the following. A
large wooden cage was covered by sheets of tin foil, insulated from the
Earth and strongly charged with the help of a Wimshurst machine. Fara­
day himself was in the cage with a sensitive electroscope. In spite of the fact
that sparks were observed when earthed bodies approached the cage from
ouside (indicating high potential difference between the cage and the
Earth), the electroscope leaves inside the cage did not show any divergence
Faraday’s experiment.
A modification of this experiment is shown in Fig. 54. If we form a cage
by using a metallic mesh and fix strips of paper on the inner and outer sur­
faces of the cage, it will be seen that only the outer strips diverge from the
mesh. This means that the electric field exists only in the space between the
cage and surrounding objects, while inside the cage the field is absent.
A modification of Faraday’s experiment. The metallic mesh is charged. The paper strips on
the outer surface are deflected indicating the presence of a charge on the outer surfaces of the
mesh. Inside the mesh there is no charge, and paper strips are not deflected.
Chapter 2
When we charge a conductor, the charges are distributed in it in such a
way that electric field vanishes and the potential difference between any
two points in it becomes zero. Let us see how the charges must be
distributed in this case.
Investigation of the charge distribution on conduc­
tor 1 with the help of a test plate 2. Inside the con­
ductor cavity the charge is absent.
We charge a hollow conductor, say, a hollow insulated sphere 1 with a
small opening (Fig. 55). Then we take a small metallic plate 2 fixed to an in­
sulating handle (“test plate”), touch with it a point on the outer surface of
the sphere, and put it in contact with an electroscope. The leaves will
diverge through a certain angle indicating that the test plate has acquired a
charge by coming in contact with the sphere. If, however, we touch with
the test plate the inner surface of the sphere, the plate will remain neutral
irrespective of the charge on the sphere. The charges can be “picked up”
only from the outer surface of a conductor, while the inner surface gives
away no charge. Moreover, if we first charge the test plate and then touch
with it the inner surface of the sphere, its entire charge will be transferred
to the conductor. This occurs irrespective of the charge present on the con­
ductor. This phenomenon was explained in detail in Sec. 2.8. Thus, in
equilibrium, charges are distributed only over the outer surface o f a con­
ductor. Of course, if we repeated the experiment shown in Fig. 45 with a
hollow conductor, touching it with the end of the wire leading to the elec­
trometer, it would be seen that the entire surface of the conductor (both in­
the outer surface is due to the action of the electric field. Equilibrium sets
in only when the entire charge is transferred to the surface of the conduc­
tor, i.e. the field strength becomes equal to zero inside the conductor and
all points of the conductor (outer surface, inner surface and the points in
the bulk of the metal) have the same potential.
Thus, a conducting surface completely shields the region enclosed by it
from the action of the electric field produced by the charges on this surface
or outside it. The lines of the external field terminate on this surface. They
cannot pass through the conducting layer, and the inner surface turns out
to be free of field. For this reason, such metallic surfaces are called elec­
trostatic shields or screens. It is important to note that even a surface
formed by a metallic mesh may serve as a shield if the mesh is dense
enough.
charged load suspended on a silk thread outside the sphere be deflected? Give a detailed
analysis of the phenomena occurring in this experiment. What will happen if the sphere is
earthed?
mesh to protect them from lightning? Why must the water pipes in such a building be
thoroughly earthed?
The fact that charges are distributed on the outer surface of a conductor is
often used in practice. When one has to transfer the charge completely
from a body to an electroscope (or electrometer), an almost closed hollow
metallic shell should be connected to the electroscope, and the charged con­
ductor should be placed in this shell. The conductor discharges completely,
and its entire charge is transferred to the electroscope. This device is called
Faraday’s cylinder since in actual practice the cavity is mainly made in the
form of a cylinder. This property of Faraday’s cylinder was used by us in
the experiment represented in Fig. 9 and described in detail in Sec. 2.8.
Van de Graaff proposed that the properties of Faraday’s cylinder be used for obtaining
very high voltages. The operation of Van de Graaff generator is explained in Fig. 56. An
Schematic diagram of the Van de Graaff generator.
endless belt made of an insulating material like silk is driven over two rollers by a motor so
that a part of it moves inside a hollow metal sphere 2 insulated from the Earth. Outside the
sphere, the belt is charged with the help of brush 3 from some source, for example, a battery
or a Wimshurst machine 4, to a voltage of 30-50 kV relative to the Earth, provided that the
second pole of the battery or machine is earthed. Inside sphere 2, charged regions of the belt
Chapter 2
come in contact with brush 5 and completely transfer their charge to the sphere. This charge is
immediately distributed over the outer surface of the sphere. Therefore, there is nothing to
prevent a perpetual transfer of charge to the sphere, and the voltage between the sphere and
the Earth continuously increases. In this way, we can obtain a voltage of the order of several
million volts. Such generators were employed in experiments on nuclear fission.
Could the Van de Graaff generator described above operate if its sphere were
made of an insulating material, or its belt were conducting (metallic)?
Let us now investigate experimentally the charge distribution on the outer
surface of a conductor. For this purpose, we shall use a test plate. It must
be flexible and so small that when it is brought in contact with a conductor
it can be treated as a part of the conductor surface. Then the charge located
on the part of the surface in contact with the plate will be transferred to it.
The ratio of this charge to the area of the surface occupied by it determines
the amount of electricity per unit surface in the region under investigation.
This quantity is termed the surface charge density in a given region. Having
brought the plate into Faraday’s cylinder, we can judge about the surface
charge density from the divergence of the electrometer leaves.
By touching different points on a charged sphere by a test plate, we can
see that the surface charge density on the sphere is the same at all points.
The charge is distributed uniformly over the outer surface of the sphere.
For conductors of a more intricate shape, the charge density distribu­
tion is much more complex. Having charged the conductor shown in
The distribution of the surface charge density over a conductor of a complex shape. If we im­
agine that the conductor is enveloped by a layer whose thickness is proportional to the surface
charge density, the layer will have the shape of the figure shown by the dashed line.
pointed region c with a test plate, we find that the surface charge density
fo r a conductor o f an arbitrary shape is different in different regions o f the
surface. The minimum value corresponds to the concave surface, while the
maximum value is observed on protruding tips. It should be recalled once
again that although the surface of such a conductor is an equipotential sur­
face (Sec. 2.13), the density of the distributed charge can be quite
Electric Field
Let us place two insulated metallic plates 1 and 2 (Fig. 58), at a certain
distance from each other, and charge them by equal and unlike charges.
This can be done in different ways. For example, the plates can be con­
charge will be transferred to one plate (i.e. a certain excess number of elec­
trons will be added to it), while a positive charge of the same magnitude
To Wimshurst
machine
Experimental investigation of the dependence of the capacitance of a capacitor on the separa­
tion between its plates: (g) as the plates are brought closer to each other, the capacitance of the
capacitor increases; the leaves of the electrometer collapse although the charge remains un­
changed, 0 ) schematic diagram of the experiment.
will appear on the other plate (i.e. the corresponding number of electrons
will be removed from the plate). We can proceed in a different way: we
earth one plate (for example, by connecting it to a water tap by a metal
wire) and touch the other plate with a charged body. As a result of elec­
trostatic induction (Sec. 1.8), there will also appear on the earthed plate a
charge equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to that on the other plate.
Whatever the charging method, the situation turns out to be the same as
if a certain charge were transferred from one plate to the other. A system
of two oppositely charged conductors is called a capacitor, and the charge
that must be transferred from one conductor to the other to charge one of
them positively and the other negatively is known as the capacitor charge.
In particular, the parallel-plate capacitor is a capacitor consisting of two
parallel plates whose separation is small in comparison with their dimen­
sions.
The potential difference between capacitor plates naturally depends on
the capacitor charge. Connecting plates 1 and 2 to an electrometer 3 and in-
Chapter 2
creasing the capacitor charge by repeated charging, we find that the
readings of the electrometer are the larger the larger charge is imparted to
the capacitor. By measuring the charge q (say, by the method described in
Sec. 1.10) and the potential difference U (for example, with the help of an
electrometer), we can verify experimentally that the potential difference U
between the plates is proportional to the charge q of each plate, and hence
the relation between these quantities can be written in the form
q = CU.
Here C is a coefficient characterizing the capacitor. It can be easily seen
that this coefficient has the following physical meaning. If we choose a
charge q so that a unit potential difference appears between the plates, it
follows from formula (2.22.1) that C = q. Thus, the quantity C determines
the charge required to charge the capacitor to the potential difference equal
to unity. For this reason, the coefficient C is known as the electric
capacitance of a capacitor, or simply capacitance. Hence it follows that the
capacitance o f a capacitor is the ratio o f its charge to the potential d if­
ference imparted by this charge to the capacitor:
C = q /U .
The SI unit of capacitance is called the farad (F) after Faraday. The
capacitance o f one farad is possessed by a capacitor such that a potential
difference o f one volt appears between its plates when a charge o f one
coulomb is imparted to them:
For practical purposes this unit is very large, and smaller units of
capacity are normally used: a microfarad (/xF) equal to 10“ 6 F or a
picofarad (pF) equal to 10“ 6/zF. Thus,
I F = 106/xF = 1012 pF,
rp IfxF = 10“ 6 F,
= 10"12F.
of 1 kV. What is the charge on each of its plates?
Simple experiments prove that the capacitance of a capacitor depends on
the shape, size and mutual arrangement of its parts. In particular, the
capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor depends on the distance between
its plates and their surface area. Let us again charge the parallel-plate
capacitor shown in Fig. 58 with the help of electrostatic induction or a
Wimshurst machine, disconnect it from the machine and vary the distance
between the plates by moving them apart or towards each other. If the
plates are thoroughly insulated from surrounding bodies, the charge im­
parted to them obviously cannot change. However, an electrometer con­
plates does not remain unchanged. When we draw the plates apart, the
electrometer indicates an increased potential difference between them. Ac­
cording to formula (2.22.1), this means that* the capacitance of the
capacitor has become smaller. Having restored the original distance be­
tween the plates, we shall observe that the reading of the electrometer, and
hence the capacitance, acquire the previous value. Having decreased the
separation between the plates, we shall see that the potential difference be­
tween the plates becomes smaller, i.e. the capacitance of the capacitor in­
creases. Instead of moving the plates apart, we can shift one of them aside,
thus decreasing the area of the plates facing each other. It will be seen that
in this case too the electrometer indicates an increase in the potential dif­
ference, i.e. a decrease in the capacitance.
These experiments clearly prove that the capacitance characterizes not a
single plate but a system o f two plates with their mutual arrangement
relative to each other. Therefore, when we refer to a capacitance, we
always mean the capacitance of a system of two bodies between which a
potential difference has set in. This, clearly, is due to the fact (Sec. 2.10)
that physical meaning can be attributed only to the potential difference be­
tween two points (in particular, between two conductors; in the case under
consideration, between the two plates forming a parallel-plate capacitor).
An electrometer is also a kind of a capacitor in which one conductor is
the rod with leaves and the other is the shell. The capacitance of the elec­
trometer depends on the mutual arrangement of its parts. Since these parts
are fixed in a certain invariable position, the capacitance of a given elec­
trometer has a quite definite value (a small variation of the capacity due to
displacement of its leaves can be neglected since the leaves are at a suffi­
ciently large distance from the shell). It is just for this reason that we can
use an electrometer for measuring the charge imparted to it (Sec. 2.14).
The divergence of the electrometer leaves is determined by the field be­
tween the leaves and the shell of the instrument, i.e. by the potential dif­
ference U between these bodies. But according to formula (2.22.1), the
charge q of the electrometer is equal to CU, where C is the capacitance of
the electrometer, which is constant for a given instrument.
Thus, we can judge about the charge on the electrometer from the
divergence of its leaves. The instrument can be graduated either in units of
potential (volts) or in units of charge (coulombs).
In an electroscope which has no metallic shell, the rod and leaves form
one conductor, while the other conductor is formed by the walls and other
Chapter 2
surrounding objects, including the body of experimenter, which is in con­
tact with the Earth. A charge imparted to the electroscope determines the
potential difference between the electroscope rod and surrounding bodies.
Having divided the charge by this potential difference, we obtain the
capacitance of the capacitor formed by the electroscope rod and surround­
ing bodies or, as it is sometimes called the capacitance of the electroscope
relative to the surrounding bodies.This capacitance, however, is no longer
constant (as for an electrometer) but depends on the random arrangement
of the bodies surrounding the electroscope. By varying the positions of
these bodies relative to the instrument (for example, the experimenter may
move towards or away from the electroscope), we can vary the capacitance
of the system, which will be manifested in the change in the electroscope
readings (Sec. 2.15).
Naturally, the same applies to any object: its capacitance relative to sur­
rounding bodies, in particular, relative to the Earth and other bodies con­
under consideration relative to these bodies and generally changes with the
displacement of the object. If, however, the surrounding bodies are suffic­
iently far from the object, small variations of its position practically do not
affect its capacitance. In such a case, the object can be treated as isolated.
The capacitance of a system (capacitor) consisting of an isolated body and
other remote objects is often called, for the sake of brevity, the capacitance
of an isolated body. It depends only on the shape and size of a given body.
In particular, the capacitance of an isolated sphere is determined only by its
radius R and, as is shown by calculations and measurements, is expressed
by the formula
C = 4ire0R = 9 ^
iq * r
= 1.11 X 10"10/?.
A sphere of 1-cm radius has a capacitance C = 1.11 x 1 0 '12 F = 1.11 pF.
If we have several charged bodies insulated from one another, the problem of determin­
ing the capacitance of such a system is much more complicated and cannot be solved just by
using a simple formula (2.22.1). We shall not consider it here. In actual practice, we mainly
deal with two conductors arranged at a very small distance from each other, and hence their
mutual capacitance is almost unaffected by other, more remote conductors.
If the Earth were an isolated conductor, it could be considered as a sphere of radius
Sec. 2.18, the configuration of the electric field of the Earth indicates that at a distance of
about 100-200 km from the surface of the Earth (in the ionosphere), there are electric charges
which form, together with the Earth, a capacitor whose capacitance is 30-50 times the above
value and attains 20000-30000 /xF, i.e. a few hundredths of a farad.
charged metallic balls, be measured? What device can be used for this purpose? Give the
schematic diagram for the set-up.
Consider the bird and the surface of the Earth as the plates of a capacitor having a very
small capacitance (due to the small surface area of the bird and the large distance to the
Earth).
If was shown in the preceding section that by charging any isolated conduc­
tor, we simultaneously create the opposite charge on surrounding conduc­
tors which are connected to the Earth and form a capacitor with this con­
ductor. However, the capacitance of such a capacitor is extremely small. In
order to obtain a higher capacitance, we must take conductors in the form
of metal plates and arrange them at a small distance from each other (the
so-called capacitor plates). It was shown above that the capacitance of a
parallel-plate capacitor is proportional to the area of the plates and inverse­
ly proportional to their separation. Therefore, if the area of the capacitor
plates is large and the dielectric layer is very thin, the capacitance of the
capacitor is very high and considerably large charges can be accumulated
is also called a condenser.
Leyden jar: (a) general view; (b) schematic diagram, I and 2 — tin foil plates, 3 — glass jar,
this type was created for the first time in the middle of the 18th century. It
Chapter 2
consists of a glass jar whose inner and outer surfaces are covered with tin
foil. The inner foil is connected with a metal rod fixed in the jar (Fig. 59b).
In order to charge a Leyden jar, it is held in hand (thus its outer plate is
connected to the Earth) and its rod is brought in contact with a charged
body, preferably with a terminal of a Wimshurst machine. The capacitance
of a medium-size Leyden jar is about 1000 pF.
*} 2.23.1. In order to charge a Leyden jar, its outer plate is usually connected to the Earth
• (the jar is held in hands), and its inner surface is brought in contact with a terminal of a
Wimshurst machine. Can the Leyden jar be charged to the same potential if, on the con­
trary, the rod is held in hands and the outer surface is touched by a terminal of the Wim­
shurst machine? What will happen if the jar charged in this way is put on the table?
Wimshurst machine, while its other plate is insulated from the Earth?
plate is earthed, he will experience a strong electric shock. Why will not this occur if the
experimenter touches the inner plate while standing on an insulating bench? The ex­
perimenter’s body on the insulating bench and the surface of the Earth should be con­
sidered as the plates of a capacitor connected in parallel to the Leyden jar. Take into ac­
count the fact that the capacitance of this capacitor is much lower than that of the
Leyden jar.
Battery of four Leyden jars: 1 — rod for charging
inner plates, 2 — rod for earthing outer (plates.
To increase the capacitance, capacitors are connected to form batteries.
plates are connected to one another, and hence the battery can be regarded
as a single large capacitor the area of whose plates is equal to the sum of the
areas of the plates of individual jars. With such a connection (which is
known as the parallel connection), the capacitance of the battery is equal to
the sum of the capacitances of individual capacitors.
engineering. It consists of two sets of insulated interleaving metal plates
one of which is connected to a spindle. The capacitance is varied by
rotating the spindle and hence the degree of interleaving (Sec. 2.22).
A variable capacitor consists of two insulated systems of metallic plates 1 and 2 which in­
terleave when the spindle is rotated.
Most of the capacitors used in engineering are of parallel-plate type, i.e.
they are basically formed by two parallel plates separated by a small gap,
on which equal and unlike charges are condensed. The capacitance of a
parallel-plate capacitor is expressed in terms of the dimensions of its parts
by a rather simple formula. Let us make the experiment represented in
simultaneously both the charge imparted to the capacitor and the emerging
potential difference. By varying the area S of the plates and the distance rf,
we see that the capacitance o f a parallel-plate capacitor is
C= We could derive this formula from theoretical consideration as well. In
measurements, as well as in calculations, the capacitor is assumed to be of
the parallel-plate type, which means that the distance d is small in com­
parison with the linear dimensions of the plates, and the gap between the
plates is filled by air (to be more precise, we should assume that air is ab­
sent).
According to formula (2.23.1), we have
„ _ C[F]rf[m]
S[m2] ’
whence it follows that e0 can be expressed in farads per metre (F/m)
Besides the parallel connection of capacitors represented in Figs. 60, 61
and 62a, when all positive and all negative plates are connected, capacitors
are sometimes connected in series, i.e. the negative plate of the first
capacitor is connected with the positive plate of the second capacitor, the
of the third capacitor, and so on (Fig. 62b).
IIIIIIII
c, c2 c, c.
To charge source:
C, C, C3 C4 To charge source
In a parallel connection, all capacitors are charged to the same potential
difference U, but the charges on them can be different. If their
capacitances are C t , C2, ... , Cn, the corresponding charges will be
q x = CxU , q 2 = C2U, ... ,q„ = C„U.
The total charge on all the capacitors is
Q = Q\ + Qi + ••• + Qn = (c \ + C2 + ... + Cn)Uy
and hence the capacitance of the entire system of capacitors is
C = - j = C x + C2 + ... + C„.
Thus, the capacitance o f a group o f parallel-connected capacitors is
equal to the sum o f capacitances o f individual capacitors.
For series-connected capacitors (Fig. 62b), the charge on all the
capacitors is the same. Indeed, let us supply, for example, a charge +q to
the left-hand plate of the first capacitor. As a result of electrostatic induc­
tion, the charge —q will appear on its right-hand plate, and the charge +q
on the left-hand plate of the second capacitor.7 This charge will in turn in7 Naturally, our line of reasoning is suitable for capacitors of any type (both parallelplate and others). In any capacitor, the field is concentrated between its plates (say, between
the cylinders of a cylindrical capacitor). Therefore, the charge induced on the second plate is
always equal and unlike the charge applied to the first plate.
duce the charge —q on the right-hand plate of the second capacitor and the
charge +q on the left-hand plate of the third capacitor, and so on. Thus,
the charge of each of the series-connected capacitors is equal to q. The
voltage across each of these capacitors is determined by the capacitance of
a given capacitor:
q_ Un = Ui c„ where C, is the capacitance of the /th capacitor. The total voltage across the
outer (free) plates of the entire group of capacitors is
i / - i / I + v l + ... + c / . - , ( £ + £
+ ... + £ ) .
Consequently, the capacitance of the entire capacitor system,
is determined by the expression
_1_ = U_ = _l_
C~ q C, Q_ C2 This formula shows that the capacitance o f a group o f series-connected
capacitors is always smaller than the capacitance o f each capacitor in the
group.
which case is the capacitance of the group higher? What is the ratio of the capacitances in
these cases?
then connected to the terminals of a battery with a voltage of 120 V. What is the voltage
across the plates of the first capacitor and the second capacitor?
capacitances of 0.0005 and 0.001 /iF and connected in parallel, in order to charge it to a
voltage of 10 kV?
capacitor of the same capacitance but charged to the voltage of 200 V (i.e. the positive
plate is connected to the positive plate and the negative plate to the negative plate). What
will be the voltage across the plates?
balls is hollow. Will the charges be distributed equally between the balls?
Experiments show that the capacitance of a capacitor depends not only on
the shape, size and mutual arrangement of its conductors but also on the
properties of the insulator (dielectric) filling the space between these con6—7185
Chapter 2
ductors. The effect o f the dielectric can be verified with the help o f tfie
following experiment. Let us charge a parallel-plate capacitor and mark the
reading o f the electrometer measuring the voltage across the capacitor.
Then we pull a neutral ebonite plate into the gap between the plates
The capacitance of a capacitor increases when an ebonite plate is inserted between its plates.
The leaves of the electrometer collapse, although the charge remains unchanged.
again show the initial reading. This indicates that when air is replaced by
ebonite, the capacitance o f the capacitor increases. If we take some other
dielectric instead o f ebonite, we obtain a similar result, but the change in
the capacitance o f the capacitor will be different. If we denote by C0 the
capacitance o f the capacitor with vacuum between its plates and by C the
capacitance o f the same capacitor when the entire gap between the plates is
filled by a dielectric, the capacitance C turns out to be e times higher than
the capacitance C0, where e is determined only by the type of dielectric.
Thus, we can write
C = eC0.
The quantity e is known as the relative perm ittivity, or simply the per­
m ittivity o f the medium filling the space between the plates o f a capacitor.8
Table 1 contains the values o f permittivity for some materials.
What has been said above is true not only for a parallel-plate capacitor
but also for a capacitor o f any type: when air is replaced by a dielectric, the
capacitance o f the capacitor is increased e times.
Sometimes the absolute permittivity ea is considered, which is defined as the product of
the relative permittivity and the electric constant: ea = ee0. This quantity, however, has no
physical meaning and will not be considered here. — Eds.
Electric Field
Table 1. Permittivity of Some Materials
Substance
Air Amber
Ceramics (for radio engineering)
Ebonite
Glass
Mica Paraffin
Quartz
Water (pure)
up to 80
Strictly speaking, the capacitance of a capacitor increases e times only if all the field lines
going from one plate to the other pass through the given dielectric. This can be observed, for
example, for a capacitor completely immersed in a liquid dielectric poured into a large vessel.
If, however, the distance between the plates is small in comparison with their dimensions, it
can be assumed that it is sufficient to fill with a dielectric only the space between the conduc­
tors since the electric field of the capacitor is practically located just in this region. For in­
stance, for a parallel-plate capacitor it is sufficient to fill with a dielectric only the space be­
tween the plates.
By placing a substance with a large permittivity between the plates, we
can considerably increase the capacitance o f the capacitor. This is used in
actual practice, and glass, paraffin, mica or other substances are employed
as dielectrics instead o f air. Figure 64 represents a technical condenser with
Technical flat capacitor: (a) in the assembled form; (b) partially assembled: 1 and 1 ' are sheets
of tin foil with bands of paraffin paper 2 between them. All bands are folded like bellows and
placed into a metal box. Contact terminals 3 and 3 ' are soldered to ends 1 and 1 ' of the
bands.
Chapter 2
a paper strip impregnated with paraffin as a dielectric. Its plates are tin
foils9 pressed at both sides against the waxed paper. The capacitance of
such capacitors may sometimes reach several microfarads. For instance, a
capacitor having a size of a match box, used in rad io engineering, has a
capacitance of 2 /xF.
Obviously, only dielectrics with good insulating properties are suitable
for manufacturing capacitors. Otherwise, charges will leak through the
dielectric. For this reason, despite its high permittivity, water is unsuitable
for making capacitors since it may serve as a sufficiently good dielectric on­
ly when purified to a very high degree.
If the space between the plates of a parallel-plate capacitor is filled by a
medium with permittivity e, formula (2.23.1) for a parallel-plate capacitor
assumes the form
C = ee0 4 .
The fact that the capacitance of a capacitor depends on the surrounding
medium indicates that the electric field changes in the bulk of a dielectric.
It was shown above that when a capacitor is filled with a dielectric having a
permittivity e, the capacitance increases e times. This means that for the
same charge on the plates, the potential difference between the plates
decreases by a factor of e. But the potential difference and the field
strength are connected through relation (2.19.1). Therefore, a decrease in
the potential difference means that the field strength in a capacitor filled
with a dielectric decreases by a factor o f e. This is the reason behind an in­
crease in the capacitance of the capacitor.
If we denote by E0 the strength of the field produced by any charged
body at a certain point in vacuum, and by E the field strength at the same
point and for the same charges in the case when the entire space is filled
with a dielectric having a permittivity e, we can write
E = E0/e.
If two point charges are in a dielectric, the field strength due to each
charge at the point where the other charge is located also decreases by a
factor of e, and hence the force acting on each charge is less than in
vacuum by a factor of e. Hence we conclude that Coulomb’s law (1.10.1)
for point charges placed in a dielectric has the form10
F = — mb- .
foil. These sheets are called tin foils just by convention.
Polarization of Dielectrics
In order to explain why the field in a dielectric is weaker than in vacuum, we must take into ac­
count the fact that all bodies consist of atoms and molecules, which in turn consist of positive
and negative charges (atomic nuclei and electrons). Thus, every dielectric is an aggregate of a
large number of charged particles.
These positive and negative charges are often arranged in molecules so that one half of a
molecule has a predominantly positive charge while the other half has a negative charge.
Roughly speaking, such a molecule has the form of a rod with oppositely charged ends
A model of a dipole molecule of a dielectric.
The positive and negative charges in each molecule are equal, and hence molecule as a whole is
perience the action of the force tending to align it along the field lines.
In the absence of an external electric field, the molecules of a substance are oriented at
random. Any part of a dielectric will contain equal numbers of positive and negative charges
with a random arrangement (Fig. 66a), and hence the resultant action of these charges will be
Polarization of a dielectric in an electric field: (a) in the absence of electric field; (b) in a weak
field, and (c) in a strong field. Positive ends of dipoles are conventionally hatched.
equal to zero. When we place a dielectric made up of dipole molecules in an electric field, the
molecules will be turned by the field forces so that their electric axes are predominantly
oriented along the field lines. By saying “predominantly”, we mean that the action of the elec­
tric field tends to arrange the molecules in a certain order, in chains, as is shown in Fig. 66b
and c.
On the other hand, the thermal motion of molecules (see Vol. 1) tends to destroy this
ordering and to restore the random, chaotic arrangement of molecules shown in Fig. 66a. The
competition between these two opposite factors, the first of which is determined by the field
strength and specific properties of a given substance and the second is determined by the
temperature, leads to a situation when pot all but a certain fraction of molecules is arranged in
a given field so that their axes are close to the direction of the field lines.
As a result of this ordering in the arrangement of molecules, equal and opposite electric
charges are induced on the surface of the dielectric. These charges are the larger, the higher
the ordering in the arrangement of molecules. The charge at the boundaries of the dielectric
shown in Fig. 66c is larger than in Fig. 66b. The dielectric acquires “electric poles” or is said
to be polarized. The weakening of a field in a dielectric is caused by its polarization.
+q -q' +Q' -q The field Ep produced by polarization charges + q ' and —q ' is opposite to the field E0 proP
duced by the charges +q and - q on the capacitor plates.
Indeed, let us imagine a parallel-plate capacitor filled with a dielectric (Fig. 67) and such
that the left-hand plate has a positive charge and the right-hand plate, a negative charge. Since
like charges repel each other while unlike charges are mutually attracted, a negative polariza­
tion charge will obviously appear on the dielectric surface facing the left-hand (positive) plate
and a positive charge will appear near the right-hand plate. Thus, the field Ep created by
polarization charges is opposite to the field E0 created by the charges on the capacitor plates
and hence suppresses it. The resultant field in the dielectric turns out to be weaker than in the
absence of the dielectric.
So far, we have considered only the action of a field on a dielectric, which is manifested
in the rotation of molecules and in the ordering of their orientation. In addition to this action
of the field, the charges can be displaced within each molecule in some substances or, in other
words, each individual molecule is said to be polarized. This effect of the field further in­
creases the polarization charges emerging on the surface of the dielectric and hence leads to a
still stronger suppression of the resultant field.
The polarization of dielectrics resembles electrostatic charging by induction (Sec. 1.8).
However, there is an important difference between these phenomena. It was shown above that
electrostatic charging by induction is due to the displacement of free electrons which can move
over the entire volume of the conductor. Separating a conductor in an electric field into two
parts, we can separate induced charges, and the two halves of the conductor will remain elec­
trically charged even after the removal of the field inducing these charges. On the other hand,
electric charges in the bulk of a dielectric cannot move freely but can only be shifted within
each molecule. Therefore, if we divide a polarized dielectric in an electric field into two parts,
each part will again consist of molecules that are neutral as a whole, and its total charge will be
zero as before. However, on the surface of each part there will be charges—negative on the
one end and positive on the other (Fig. 68). This is quite clear since we can apply the same line
of reasoning to each part as to the whole piece of the dielectric. When the external field is re­
moved, the charges within the molecules return to their initial random positions as a result of
thermal movement, and polarization charges vanish. Thus, unlike induced charges, polariza­
tion charges cannot be separated from one another. For this reason polarization charges are
often referred to as bound charges.
rr~q rr~=\ r+~^i rr~=i + rr~^i
+ E Z 3E Z 3 EZE1I*7"3!
[V~=\ rr~=\ rr~=\ —
r+~=i
rr~q r+~q rr^q EZ3-EZ3 +
+ EZ1E3EZ3E3I
+ E31E 3E ZE H E 31
+ O E 3 E 3 E 3
+ F~=l F~=l E 3 ) tZSl
+ E 3 E 3 E 3 E 3
+ E 3 E 3 E 3 E 3
When a polarized dielectric is divided into two parts, unlike polarization charges emerge on
the surfaces of each half. Polarization of the dielectric (a) before the separation and 0 ) after
the separation.
In order to charge a capacitor, i.e. to create a certain potential difference
between two bodies, e.g. capacitor plates, a certain work has to be done.
This is due to the fact that the process of charging, as was mentioned in
Sec. 1.5, is always associated with separation o f charges, i.e. the accumula­
tion o f excess charges o f one sign in one body and the charges o f the other
sign in the other body. In this process, the attraction between positive and
capacitor is discharged, i.e. the charges that were formerly separated are
combined, the same work is done by the electric forces. Thus, a charged
capacitor has a store o f potential energy, which is equal to the work that
has been done during its charging.
We can formulate these facts in a different way. By charging a
capacitor, we create an electric field in it. This field vanishes when the
capacitor is discharged. The work done is spent to produce the Held, while
the work done in discharging the capacitor is a result o f vanishing o f this
field. Hence, we can say that any fie ld possesses a store o f potential energy
which is released when this fie ld vanishes.
In the simple case of a parallel-plate capacitor (Fig. 69), this work can be easily
calculated. As long as the distance d between the plates is small in comparison with their size,
the field strength E in the parallel-plate capacitor does not depend on d. Indeed, in a parallelplate capacitor the field is uniform and its strength E = U /d. But the potential difference be­
tween the plates is U = q /C , while the capacitance C = e0S /d (we assume that between the
plates is vacuum, and S is the area of the plates). Thus,
£ =^ =
%d = JL ,
Cd e0S ’
Chapter 2
i.e. when q and S are constant, the electric field strength E does not depend on d since U
changes with d.
The force with which two oppositely charged plates attract each other depends on the
charge q on each plate and on the field strength E. Since neither q nor E change with d t the at­
tractive force F also remains unchanged. Therefore, the work that must be done to move the
plates apart from the zero distance between them to d is A = Fd. However, moving the plates
apart we charge the capacitor with the distance d between the plates. Indeed, when the separa­
tion of the plates is equal to zero, i.e. the plates are in contact, their charges +q and —q form
a compensated double layer, and the system is uncharged. In the previous discussion (see
Sec. 1.7), we considered in detail the emergence of charges on two bodies as the separation of
charges of the double layer when the bodies are moved apart.
The energy W possessed by a charged capacitor is equal to the work A - Fd which has
been done to charge it: W = A . In order to calculate this work, we must determine the force
F. For this we shall use the electric field strength E in the capacitor. We can regard E as the
resultant of two equal electric field strengths
and E2 one of which is due to the positive
charge +q on one (upper) plate and the other due to the negative charge - q on the
other (lower) plate (Fig. 69). Obviously, these field strengths have the same direction so that
+Q When the plates of a parallel-plate capacitor (with the field strength E), bearing the charges
+ q and —q are moved apart by a distance d , the work A = Eqd/2 is done.
E = E x + E2. SinceE x = E2 (since the two plates and their charges are symmetric), we have
E x = E2 - E /2. The force F of interaction of the plates is the force with which the field E {
due to the charge +q on the upper plate acts on the charge - q of the lower plate and pulls it
up. But, on the other hand, F is the force with which the field E2 due to the charge —q on the
lower plate acts on the charge +q of the upper plate and pulls it down.
Thus,
F = E lg = E2g = — ~,
i.e. W = A= Fd =
and since
we have
Considering that the charge q of the capacitor is equal to CU, we can write this formula in the
form W = CU1/! .
If the charge in formulas (2.27.4) and (2.27.5) is expressed in coulombs, potential dif­
ference in volts, and capacitance in farads, the energy will be expressed in joules. Formula
jar or a battery of several jars is more powerful, viz. is accompanied by a louder sound and a
stronger physiological effect than that emerging during the discharge of a capacitor having a
lower capacitance, the voltage being the same. The battery has a larger store of energy than a
single jar. Lightning is a sort of discharge of a capacitor whose “plates” are either two clouds
or a cloud and the surface of the Earth. The capacitance of such a capacitor is comparatively
small, but the energy stored in the lightning is considerable because the voltage across such a
capacitor reaches 1CF V.
Direct Current
It is well known that the necessary condition for charge equilibrium on a
conductor is that the potential difference between any two points o f the
conductor be zero. If this condition is violated, equilibrium cannot be
established, and a displacement o f charges called the electrical current
takes place in the conductor. Thus, in order to obtain current, it is suffi­
cient to create a potential difference (voltage) between certain points on a
conductor.
Let us realize these conditions in the following simple experiment il­
lustrated by the circuit shown in Fig. 70. The left-hand side o f the circuit
Experiment illustrating the concepts of current and emf: C — capacitor, B — bulb, G —
galvanometer, WM — Wimshurst machine, E — electrometer and Sw — switch.
represents an electric machine producing a potential difference across the
plates A and B o f a capacitor o f capacitance C. The electrometer makes it
possible to detect and even measure this potential difference. The righthand side o f the diagram shows the connection o f two capacitor plates with
the help o f a conductor consisting o f leads and a bulb. In order to make the
process o f creating voltage across the capacitor plates and the process o f
connecting the plates by the conductor visual, a switch is included in the
circuit. Turning it to the left, we charge the capacitor (create a voltage
across its plates); by turning it to the right, we connect the plates to the con­
ductor. Let us put the electric machine in operation (by hand or by an elec­
tric motor) and turn the key in the left-hand position. The capacitor will
start being charged, and the electrometer will indicate the voltage across
the capacitor plates. Then we turn the key to the right. The bulb will flash,
and the leaves o f the electrometer will collapse, indicating that the voltage
across the capacitor plates has dropped to zero, i. e. the field in the
capacitor has vanished. Turning the key to the left again, we shall charge
the capacitor again while by switching it to the right we shall again observe
the flash o f the bulb, and so on.
What phenomena occur in this experiment? By charging the capacitor
with the help o f an electric machine, we separate electric charges. An excess
o f electrons appears at the terminal a o f the machine, and hence on the
capacitor plate A connected with it, while the corresponding deficiency o f
electrons is created on the other terminal b (and the plate B ). A voltage
the capacitor plates). It is well known (Sec. 2.27) that work has to be done
for this. In the experiment under consideration, this work is done either by
the hand muscles or by the motor rotating the machine. When the conduc­
tor is connected to the plates, a potential difference emerges across its ends,
and charges start moving in the conductor: electrons move from region A
where they are in excess to region B where they are in deficit. The charge on
the plates rapidly decreases, the voltage across the capacitor drops, and the
motion o f charges (electric current) occurs in the conductor, which is
manifested in the glow o f the bulb. The discharge o f the capacitor and the
passage o f current take a small fraction o f a second. In order to make this
process more durable, we must repeat it many times by switching the key
from the left-hand to the right-hand position and back, i. e. by charging
and discharging the capacitor.
The capacitor was introduced in the circuit in order to single out two
aspects o f the process responsible for the electric current: (a) creating and
maintaining a voltage (potential difference) between two points and (b)
connecting a conducting circuit to let charges move between these two
points.
The first part o f the experiment under consideration is ensured with the
help o f the electric machine separating the charges. The second part o f the
process is realized with the help o f the key connecting the circuit. It is not
cess may proceed simultaneously and continuously. The role o f the
capacitor is purely illustrative. We could do without it, by directly con­
the electric machine. In such a circuit, an electric current continuously
flows during the operation o f the machine since, in spite o f the continuous
transfer o f electrons from a to b through the wires and the filament o f the
bulb, the potential difference between b and a is continuously restored due
Chapter 3
to the operation of the machine. True, an ordinary Wimshurst machine
could not sustain the glow of the bulb. This machine separates small
amounts of electricity per unit time so that its power, which is sufficient for
feeding individual (however frequent) flashes, is too low to maintain a con­
tinuous glow of the bulb. To detect a continuous weak current we should
have to use a more sensitive indicator (like a galvanometer). Thus, the
essential parts of the circuit in this experiment are the machine and the con­
ductor connecting its terminals.
It follows from the example considered above that in order to maintain
a continuous current in the circuit o f conductors, it is necessary to include
in the circuit a device where the processes o f separation o f electric charges
occur all the time, thus maintaining the voltage in the circuit. Such a device
is known as the source, or generator o f electric current, while the causes of
separation of electric charges are referred to as extraneous forces.
Extraneous forces, i. e. forces of nonelectrostatic origin, operate only
within a source of current. By separating charges, these forces create a
potential difference across the terminals of the remaining part of the cir­
cuit. The motion of charges in this part is due to the electric field emerging
in the conductor as a result of the potential difference created between its
ends.
As an electric charge moves over a closed circuit, the work done by elec­
trostatic forces is equal to zero (Sec. 2.9). Consequently, the total work of
all the forces acting on the charge during such a displacement is equal to
the work done by the extraneous forces only. Therefore, the electromotive
force cf of a current source is the ratio of the work A done by extraneous
forces in displacing a positive charge q over a closed circuit to this charge:
<f=-.
It should be borne in mind that the term “electromotive force” (emf) can­
work. It follows from a comparison of formulas (2.10.1) and (3.1.1) that
emf <? is expressed in volts. In order to represent the process under in­
vestigation still more clearly, let us use the analogy between current and the
flow of water in a pipe.
It is well known that in order to maintain the water flow in the pipe in
spite of decelerating effect of friction, a certain pressure drop should be
created between points along the pipe. It is this pressure drop that makes
the water flow. In a water supply system, for example, this pressure drop is
created by a water tower in which the level of water is higher than at any
other point of the system. The difference in water levels (the head) is com-
pletely equivalent to the potential difference (voltage) in an electric circuit,
while water tank filled with water located at the top of the water tower
plays the role of a charged capacitor in the example considered above. In
the same way as the capacitor is discharged while electric current flows and
the potential difference decreases and tends to zero, the tank is gradually
emptied, and the water flow ceases like the electric current. The electric
current flows for a rather short time which is determined by the
capacitance of the capacitor and the current. Similarly, water flow ceases
the sooner, the smaller the capacity of the tank and the higher the water
flow rate. Finally, to maintain a continuous electric current, it is necessary
to have a device (generator) which would be a source of “electromotive
of a water supply, a device (pressure pump) is needed to maintain the re­
quired difference in levels in spite of a continuous water flow and to serve
as a source of “watermotive (to be more precise, water-lifting) force” .
Here too the role of the wateF tank is quite auxiliary. We could provide
an operation of water supply without a tank by using a pressure pump.
However, since water consumption is nonuniform in a water supply
system, it is more convenient to have a “storage head” created by an
elevated water tank having a large capacity. Then the pressure pump can be
switched on only from time to time.
Without dwelling into the discussion on types of generators used in
practice, we shall describe a simple experiment which visually illustrates the
emergence of an emf.
We take a tall glass containing distilled water and introduce into it two
metallic electrodes 1 and 2 connected to each other through a sensitive in­
strument for measuring current, viz. a galvanometer (Fig. 71). Then we
drop into water small glass balls one after another. It will be seen that as
long as the balls are being dropped into the glass, the instrument indicates
an electric current in the leads. This can be easily explained. Coming in
contact with water, glass balls acquire a negative charge while a fraction of
water molecules acquires a positive charge (cf. Fig. 13). Under the action of
the force of gravity, the negatively charged balls fall onto the metallic plate
charge plate 1 with a positive charge. As a result, a potential difference
causes the displacement of electrons from 2 to 7, and an electric current
flows in the leads.
Thus, this simple device is a generator of electric current where the role
of extraneous forces is played by the force of gravity which makes
the mutual attraction of positive and negative charges tends to prevent
Chapter 3
A current generator (the role of extraneous forces is played by the force of gravity).
them from moving apart. Overcoming this attraction, the force o f gravity
separates the charges and thus ensures the emergence o f voltage across
plates 1 and 2.
This experiment clarifies one more very important circumstance. If the
liquid into which we drop glass balls were a perfect d ie lectricth en discon­
leads to the rod and shell o f an electrometer, we could directly measure the
voltage between electrodes 1 and 2, which would increase as long as the
balls sink in the liquid and the charge is accumulated on the electrodes.
When would the processes o f charge accumulation and increase in the
voltage between the electrodes be terminated? Obviously, as the charge o f
the electrodes and the field between them increase, the forces o f the electric
field which prevent the balls from falling grow continually. If the liquid
were a perfect dielectric, the forces o f the electric field would ultimately
balance the force o f gravity, and the falling o f balls and the increase in the
potential difference between the electrodes would cease. Thus, we see that
the potential difference across the terminals o f a disconnected generator (in
the example under consideration, the generator is the glass with balls fall-1
cannot be established between the rod and shell of the electrometer when they are connected
by a conducting (although poorly) water column.
ing in it) increases until the electric forces created by it balance the ex­
traneous forces. The same is true for any other electric current generator.
Therefore, the measure o f the electromotive force operating in a generator
is the potential difference created across the terminals o f the disconnected
generator.
It should be emphasized that the emf o f a generator is measured by the
potential difference across its terminals provided that the circuit is discon­
trodes is determined by the current in the circuit and is the smaller the
stronger the current. Therefore, the same source, depending on the current
supplied by it, may have different voltages across its terminals. The max­
imum voltage corresponds to a disconnected circuit and is equal to the emf
o f the source.
All that has been said above remains meaningful in the mechanical
analogy. Suppose that the water supply system is disconnected. Then what
is the level to which a pump will raise the water in the tower? Obviously,
the level o f water will increase until the force o f pressure o f water column
in the tower, which counteracts the operation o f the pump, balances the
force with which the pump pushes the water. Thus, the height o f water co­
lumn or, to be more precise, the pressure o f this column with a discon­
the pump. If, however, the water supply system is connected to the tower,
i. e. the water discharge takes place along with the water inflow, the level
o f water and its pressure are always lower than in the case when the water
supply is disconnected.
It was mentioned above that electric current is the process o f motion o f
charges in a body when a potential difference is created between its parts.
However, the origin o f “charge carriers”, i. e. the charged particles whose
motion constitutes an electric current, can be quite different. The most
simple and visual case is that in which charge carriers are just small charged
grains o f a substance, like the glass balls in the experiment represented in
phenomena involving electric current. In most cases when electric current
passes through various bodies, charge carriers are either ions (positively or
case, the substance is said to possess ion conductivity, or, in other words,
the mechanism o f conduction is ionic. In the latter case, we have electron
conductivity. There are cases o f combined conduction when charge carriers
are both ions and free electrons simultaneously.
Chapter 3
In all cases o f electron and ion conduction, no displacement o f elec­
trically charged particles is directly observed. However, electric current
causes various phenomena which do not occur with fixed charges. The
presence o f current can always be detected from these accompanying
phenomena and effects. Let us consider them in greater detail.
We connect a source o f current with devices shown in Fig. 72. When the
circuits are closed, the following phenomena will be observed.
The filament o f a bulb becomes red-hot and starts to glow (Fig. 72a).
This means that the current causes the heating o f the conductor through
which it passes, i. e. an electric current produces thermal effect. It should
be noted that not only the filament but all the other conductors are also
heated in this experiment, but this heating is less pronounced.
Various effects of electric current: (a) the glowing of an incandescent bulb, (b) the arrange­
ment of magnetic needle perpendicular to the current-carrying wire, (c) liberation of
hydrogen and oxygen from acidified water poured into a U-vessel made of glass.
and remains in the new position as long as the key is closed. An electric cur­
rent produces magnetic effect.
surface and are accumulated in the upper parts o f both arms o f the
U-shaped vessel filled with acidified water. Analyzing these gases, we see
that oxygen is liberated at the electrode connected to the positive terminal
o f the cell, while hydrogen is liberated at the electrode connected to the
and submerging its end into soap Water, we can fill soap bubbles with the
mixture o f these gases known as detonating, or oxyhydrogen, gas. If we
bring a burning match to these bubbles, they explode. Thus, the electric
current passing through acidified water decomposes it into constituents.
An electric current produces chemical effect.
Experiment shows that the chemical effect o f current is observed not in
all conductors. In metals, electric current does not cause any chemical
transformation. On the other hand, in solutions o f sulphuric acid, com­
mon salt, saltpeter and many other substances, electric current causes the
liberation o f constituents. Accordingly, all conductors are divided into
two groups, viz. the first-kind conductors in which electric current causes
conductors which are decomposed by an electric current into components.
The other term for the second-kind conductors is electrolytes, and the
phenomenon o f decomposition o f a substance by a current is known as
electrolysis.
A conductor through which a current passes may be heated to a smaller
or larger extent depending on its properties. In the experiment described
above, the filament o f the bulb is strongly heated (above 1500 °C), while
other wires o f the same circuit are heated insignificantly. Some metals (like
lead) can be transformed into a state (known as the superconducting state)
in which they are practically not heated by the current (Sec. 3.11). Thus,
the thermal effect o f the current depends on the properties o f a conductor.
On the other hand, the magnetic effect o f the current is observed in all
cases, irrespective o f the properties o f conductors. A magnetic needle ar­
ranged in parallel to any current-carrying conductor (Fig. 73) is always
Effect of electric current on a magnetic needle does not depend on the properties of a currentcarrying conductor. The current produced by battery B of galvanic cells when the key is closed
passes through solid (wire /), liquid (solution 2 of conducting liquid) and gaseous (tube con­
taining rarefied gas 3) conductors and causes the deflection of the magnetic needle in the
vicinity of each conductor. The needle is arranged at right angle to the conductor.
Chapter 3
deflected irrespective o f the properties o f the conductor.2 Therefore, the
magnetic effect o f current should be regarded as the most typical
manifestation o f current. In this connection, Faraday wrote that there is no
other effect which is more typical o f the electric current.
Let us consider once again the experiment shown in Fig. 72, but now con­
the wire formerly fixed to the positive terminal is now connected to the
o f current (glowing o f the bulb) remains unchanged. The magnetic needle
is deflected in the opposite direction. Oxygen is now liberated at the elec­
trode where hydrogen was formerly liberated, and so on. Therefore, in
order to characterize a current, it is necessary to indicate the generator ter­
minal to which a given conductor is connected. However, instead o f this,
the direction o f current is usually indicated. It is assumed by convention
that the current in the external circuit o f a generator is directed from the
positive to the negative terminal. Therefore, when the current is said to
pass from point a to point b in a conductor, this means that point a is con­
terminal, i. e. the potential difference between points a and b is positive.
In other words, fo r the direction o f current we conditionally assume the
direction in which positive charges would move under the action o f poten­
tial difference. This does not mean, however, that only positive charges
always move in all conductors. On the contrary, in some cases only
ductors unlike charges move in opposite directions. In particular, it was
mentioned above (Sec. 1.6) that in the most important conductors, viz.
metals, only electrons which carry a negative charge can move. When a cell
is closed through a metal wire, the electric Held displaces electrons towards
increasing potential (Sec. 2.10), i. e. from the negative to the positive pole.
Thus, the direction opposite to the motion o f electrons is taken as the
positive direction o f current. It should be admitted that this choice is inap­
propriate. It was made when the concept o f electrons and their properties
had not been introduced, and the nature o f charge carriers in metals was
unclear.
of a mercury lamp used in medicine. It should only be remembered that spectators must be
protected from the harmful effect of ultraviolet radiation emitted by this lamp by enclosing it
in a glass tube.
The presence o f current can be detected by any o f the phenomena described
in Sec. 3.2. But electric current can also be characterized quantitatively.
The current in a conductor is the physical quantity equal to the amount o f
electricity passing per unit time through the cross section o f the conductor.
Thus, if the amount o f electricity equal to q passes in time t through the
conductor cross section the current is given by
/ = In order to avoid confusion, it should be emphasized once again that
the transfer o f charge + q in one direction or the charge —q in the opposite
direction are quite identical from the point o f view o f determining the cur­
rent. Therefore, the charge q appearing in formula (3.4.1) stands for the
sum o f charges that were actually transferred by positive charge carriers in
the direction that was conditionally taken as the direction o f current and by
magnitude and direction do not vary with time is known as direct current.
First o f all, we must find out whether the current is the same in all sec­
tions o f a conductor. If this is indeed so, then electric charges pass through
the conductor without being accumulated, viz. the same amount of elec­
tricity passes in equal time intervals through any cross section o f the con­
ductor. Such a current is called steady-state, or steady current. Ex­
periments show that a very short time is required for a current to attain a
steady state. Therefore, a direct current is always a steady current. If,
however, the current is not constant but varies with time in magnitude and
even in direction, a nonsteady current can be observed with a high rate o f
variation. This means that currents o f various magnitudes can be observed
in different cross sections o f a conductor at the same moment o f time. The
longer the conductor, the higher the probability that such a situation
emerges for an alternating current. Henceforth, we shall always deal with
steady currents whose magnitude can be measured at any section o f a con­
ductor.
The unit o f current is called an ampere (A) after the French physicist
A . M. Ampere (1775-1836). The definition o f an ampere will be given in
Sec. 14.2. Smaller units are also used: a milliampere (mA) is equal to a
thousandth o f an ampere and a microampere 0*A) is equal to a millionth o f
an ampere.
If we know the current / in a conductor and the time t during which the
current flows, we can find the charge q that has passed through the conduc7«
Chapter 3
tor during this time. According to formula (3.4.1) the charge is
q = I t.
through the cross section of a wire carrying a current of 1 A?
Carriers
Let us imagine a long electric circuit like a telegraph line between two
localities separated by a distance, say, o f 1000 km. Thorough experiments
show that the effects o f current start to be manifested in the second town
after their motion has begun in the conductors in the first town. It can be
stated not very accurately but quite visually, that the current propagates
along the wires at a velocity o f 300 000 km /s.
This, however, does not imply that charge carriers move in a conductor
at this very high velocity so that an electron or ion located initially in the
first town will reach the second town in 1/300 o f a second. This is not so.
The motion o f carriers in a conductor takes place, as a rule, at a very low
velocity o f several millimetres per second or even lower. Thus, we must
precisely distinguish between the concepts o f “velocity o f current” and
“velocity o f charge carriers”.
In order to make clear what we mean by speaking o f the “velocity o f
current” , let us consider again the experiment with a periodic charging and
discharging o f the capacitor represented in Fig. 70, but now suppose that
the leads on the right-hand side o f this figure, through which the capacitor
is discharged, are so long that the bulb or the instrument for detecting cur­
rent are, say, at a distance o f 1000 km from the capacitor. At the moment
when we turn the key to the right, electrons in the segments o f the leads ad­
joining the capacitor are set in motion. Electrons leak from the negative
plate A . At the same time, in view o f induction, the positive charge on the
plate B must decrease, i. e. electrons must flow to the plate B from the
tial difference between them start to decrease.
But the displacement of electrons occurring in the segments o f the wires
adjoining the capacitor plates leads to the emergence o f additional elec­
trons (in the region near A ) or to a decrease in their number (in the region
process embraces new and new regions o f the circuit, and ultimately the
motion o f electrons starts in the bulb filament, which is manifested in its
glow (flash). Obviously, similar phenomena are observed after any
generator has been switched on.
Thus, the motion o f charges originating in one region propagates over
the entire circuit through the variation o f electric field. More and more
remote charges are involved in this motion one by one, and this transfer o f
action from one charge to another occurs at a very high speed (of about
point o f the circuit to another at this velocity, or this is the velocity o f prop­
agation o f a change in the electric field, emerging in a certain region o f the
circuit, along the wires.
Thus, the velocity which we call f o r brevity the I“velocity o f current” is
the velocity ofpropagation o f variations o f the fie ld along a conductor and
is by no means the velocity o f m otion o f charge carriers in it.
Let us confirm this by using a mechanical analogy. Let us suppose that
two towns are connected with an oil pipeline, and that a pump is put in
operation, thus increasing oil pressure in one o f these towns. This increased
pressure is transmitted over the liquid in the pipeline at a high velocity o f
about a kilometre per second. Thus, in a second the particles separated
from the pump by 1 km will be set in motion, in two seconds the pressure
will propagate over a distance o f 2 km, in a minute over a distance o f 60
km, and so on. In about a quarter o f an hour, oil will flow out o f the pipe
in the second town. However, the motion o f oil particles proper is much
slower, and it may take several days for certain particles o f oil to pass from
the first town to the second. Returning to electric current, we must say that
the “velocity o f current” (the velocity o f propagation o f the electric field) is
similar to the velocity o f propagation o f pressure along the pipeline, while
the “velocity o f carriers” is similar to the velocity o f motion o f oil particles.
Depending on the magnitude o f a current, its effects are manifested to dif­
ferent extents. Therefore, for measuring current, use can be made o f any o f
its effects: chemical, thermal or magnetic. The instruments intended for
measuring current are termed galvanometers.
We shall first describe the simplest type o f galvanometer based on the
thermal effect o f current (Fig. 74). It consists o f a thin wire I, fixed at the
ends, through which the current to be measured is passed. A strong thin
thread 2 wound around the axle o f pointer O, connects the middle o f the
wire with a stretched spring. Under the action o f current, wire 1 is heated
and elongated. The thread stretched by the spring rotates the pointer
through a certain angle which depends on the elongation o f the wire, i. e.
Chapter 3
Schematic diagram of a thermal (hot-wire) ammeter: (a) the current through the ammeter is
absent; (ft) the current is switched on.
on the current strength. The scale o f the galvanometer is graduated for
current in amperes (or fractions o f an ampere). In this case, the
galvanometer is called an ammeter (or milliammeter).
In order to measure current, the galvanometer (or ammeter) must be
connected so that the total current o f the circuit can pass through it. For
this purpose, the circuit should be disconnected at some point, and the ends
thus obtained should be fixed to the terminals o f the ammeter. In other
words, the ammeter should be connected in series to the circuit (Fig. 75).
Since we are measuring a steady-state current, the part o f the circuit to
which the instrument is connected is immaterial.
Measurement of a current passing through a bulb with the help of an ammeter: (a) general
view of the set-up; (ft) diagram of the circuit.
It was shown in Sec. 2.13 that when charges are in equilibrium, the voltage
between any two points o f a conductor is zero. Conversely, if a current
passes through a conductor, a voltage must exist between different points
o f the conductor. Let us consider the voltage distribution in a currentcarrying conductor.
Let us wind two wires on the ends o f an insulated wooden rod (at points
a and b, Fig. 76) and connect them to the poles o f an operating Wimshurst
Voltage distribution along a wooden rod ab carrying a current. Connecting an electrometer to
different points a and c of the rod, we can see that the voltage is the higher the closer point b
to point c.
machine. Since wood is a conductor (although poor), an electric current
emerges in the rod. (This current is so weak that it can be detected and
measured only with the help o f a sensitive galvanometer.) By connecting
the leaves and the shell o f an electrometer to any two points a and c o f the
rod, we see that there is a certain voltage between them. This voltage is the
larger, the larger the distance along the rod between the points being com­
pared and attains its maximum value between the ends o f the rod.
The same can be observed if we use galvanic cells instead o f the Wim­
shurst machine and produce current not in the wooden rod but in a metallic
conductor. For this we can take a piece o f steel wire and use it to shortcircuit a battery o f a few series-connected elements. The current in the wire
is much stronger than in the wooden rod, and it can easily be measured by
an ammeter connected in series to the circuit. However, in this experiment
the voltage between different points o f the wire will be small, and a more
sensitive instrument than the laboratory electrometer is required for its
measurement. But in this experiment too it will be revealed that there is a
voltage between different points o f the wire, which attains its maximum
value between its ends. In a current-carrying conductor, there is a voltage
between the ends o f any its segment.
The potential difference existing between any two points o f a currentcarrying conductor is completely similar to the pressure drop in a liquid
Chapter 3
flowing in the presence o f friction along the pipeline, which was considered
in Vol. 1. This similarity can be observed with the help o f the device
represented in Fig. 77, which does not require any explanation. If the righthand end o f the horizontal tube is closed with a valve, there will be no flow,
Distribution of the pressure of a liquid in the tubes is similar to the voltage drop in an electric
circuit.
and in all the pressure gauges 7 , 2 , ... the level o f the liquid is the same
between different points o f the tube just as there is no potential difference
between the points o f a conductor carrying no current. When the valve is
opened, a flow o f liquid takes place, and the levels o f the liquid in the
pressure gauges become arranged along an inclined line, indicating a
pressure drop along the tube.
On the basis o f the experiments described in the preceding section, we can
establish an important law known as Ohm's law after the German physicist
G. Ohm (1787-1854). By measuring simultaneously the voltage across a
segment o f a conductor and the current passing through it, we see that the
current in any segment o f the conductor is proportional to the potential
difference across this segment.
Representing the proportionality factor between the current / and the
voltage U in the form 1/7?, we can write Ohm’s law in the form
I = -•
The larger the value of 7?, the smaller the current for the same voltage
across the conductor ends. For this reason, the quantity/? was termed elec­
tric resistance o f the conductor, or simply resistance. Resistance depends
on the properties o f a conductor. Ohm’s law can also be written in the form
U = IR .
Formulas (3.8.1) and (3.8.2) indicate that for a given voltage U between
the ends o f conductors having different resistances /?, the current is the
smaller, the higher the resistance. Thus, an increase in the conductor
resistance signifies an increase in the number o f obstacles to the motion o f
electric charge carriers in the conductor under the action o f the applied
voltage.
The processes responsible for these obstacles can easily be visualized.
The motion o f charges in a metallic conductor is the motion o f electrons
among positive ions formed as a result o f separation o f these conduction
electrons from the atoms constituting the metal. In electrolytes, this is the
motion o f positive and negative ions in opposite directions, which takes
place among nonionized molecules o f a solution. It is natural to assume
that the ordered motion o f charged particles which forms a current and oc­
curs among numerous particles that do not take part in this motion but
only “mark time” in random thermal motion is accompanied by a very
large number o f collisions o f charge carriers with other particles. These col­
lisions hinder the motion o f charged particles along a conductor and are
responsible for the resistance o f conductors to the passage o f current.
These considerations allow us to predict that resistance depends on the
geometrical dimensions o f a conductor, viz. its length and cross-sectional
area, as well as on its composition and structure, which determine the
fect o f temperature also cannot be ruled out since more or less brisk ther­
mal motion o f particles may affect the number o f collisions.
The SI unit o f resistance is the resistance o f a conductor in which a cur­
rent o f one ampere is induced when a voltage o f one volt is maintained
across its ends. This unit is called an ohm (Q). If in formula (3.8.1) we ex­
press voltage in volts and resistance in ohms, the current will be obtained in
amperes.
Ohm’s law, being a fundamental law for electric current, has a sense only when the ratio of
U to /, i. e. resistance, is a constant quantity for a given conductor. In other words, Ohm’s
law is valid for conductors whose resistance does not depend on the applied voltage and cur­
rent. This type of conductors includes metals, coal and electrolytes. However, the resistance
of gases which are made conducting (for example, ionized by heating) depends on the applied
voltage, and hence Ohm’s law is not valid for gases (if only we do not confine ourselves to a
low voltage which does not affect the resistance of an ionized gas). There also exist some other
conducting materials to which Ohm’s law is not applicable.
Chapter 3
different for different persons). Assuming that this resistance is equal to 36 000 0-,
calculate the current passing through a person touching a 220 V cable.
Warning. This current may be deadly, hence one should avoid touching bare con­
ductors.
It was indicated in the preceding section that the electric resistance is dif­
ferent for different conductors and may depend on the material o f the con­
ductors as well as on their size. Henceforth, we shall consider “wires” , i. e.
conductors whose cross sections are small in comparison with their length.
This type o f conductors includes cables (wires) and busbars (narrow long
metal plates).
Let us investigate the dependence o f the resistance o f a wire on its
dimensions. Having measured the voltage U across the ends o f the wire and
the current / passing through it, we can calculate its resistance R from the
formula
Let us consider some simple cases.
A homogeneous wire o f a constant cross-sectional area (Fig. 78). Us­
ing a sufficiently sensitive electrometer (Sec. 2.14) we shall measure the
r 'H F — © — i
Circuit diagram for an experiment showing that the resistance
of a homogeneous wire of a constant cross section is propor­
tional to its length: ab — homogeneous wire, c — an in­
termediate point on it, B — galvanic cell battery, A — ammeter,
E — electrometer.
voltage between any two points (say, c and b ). The current I in the conduc­
tor is the same everywhere. Using relation (3.9.1), we can find the
resistance o f various segments o f the wire. These measurements show that
the resistance o f a segment o f the homogeneous wire is proportional to its
length I.
A conductor is formed by the wires made o f the same material and
having the same length but different cross-sectional areas (Fig. 79). We
measure the voltage between points a and b, b and c, and c and d which
HbV-O-l
Circuit diagram for an experiment showing that the resistances
of the wires made of the same material and having the same
length but different cross-sectional areas are inversely propor­
tional to the cross-sectional areas: ab, be and cd are wires, B —
the battery of galvanic cells, A — ammeter, E — electrometer.
correspond to segments o f the same length, and calculate the resistances
/?,, R 2 and R 3 o f these segments with the help o f formula (3.9.1). It will be
seen that the resistances o f the segments o f the same length are inversely
proportional to the cross-sectional areas o f the segments.
If we use in the experiment described in the previous item the wires o f
the same length and cross-sectional area but made o f different materials
r + -V -0 -i
Circuit diagram for the experiment demonstrating that the
resistance of the wires of the same length and cross-sectional
area, but made of different materials depends on the wire
material: ab, be and cd — wires, B — galvanic cell battery, A —
ammeter and E — electrometer.
wire is much lower than that o f steel wire. Hence, the resistance o f a wire
depends on its material.
The obtained results can be summarized in the following formula:
R = P -.
Here R is the resistance o f the wire, / is its length, S is the cross-sectional
area, and p is the proportionality factor which depends on the material.
The quantity p is known as the resistivity o f a material. It is equal to the
resistance o f a cylinder made o f a given material, having a unit length and a
unit cross-sectional area.
The SI unit o f resistivity is ohm • metre (0 • m). For p = 10 • m, a cylin­
drical conductor having the cross-sectional area S = 1 m2 and the length
/ = 1 m has a resistance R = 1 0 .
Chapter 3
The reciprocal o f resistance is called the electric conductance. The SI
unit o f conductance is a siemens3 (S), which was named after the German
physicist and electrical engineer E. W. Siemens (1816-1892). A conduc­
tance o f 10 S corresponds to a conductor having the electrical resistance o f
resistance o f 10 fi.
The quantity a reciprocal to resistivity is known as electric conductivity:
a — The conductivity is measured is siemens per metre (S/m ).
Table 2 contains the values o f resistivity p (in ohm-metres) for a few
materials. The second column contains the values o f resistance/? (in ohms
per metre) for a wire o f a unit length and a diameter o f one millimetre. The
third column gives the values o f conductivity a in siemens per metre.
Table 2. Resistivity and Related Quantites for Some Substances at 0 °C
Substance
Silver (chemically pure)
Copper (chemically pure)
Copper (technical)
Aluminium
Tungsten
Platinum
Iron (chemically pure)
Iron (technical)
Lead Nickeline (Cu-Ni-Mn alloy)
Manganin (Cu-Ni-Mn alloy)
Constantan (Cu-Ni alloy)
Mercury
Nichrome (Ni-Cr alloy)
Sulphuric acid (10% solution)
Common salt (10% solution)
Copper sulphate (10% solution)
Wood Marble
Quartz (fused)
p, R, 0 /m
An element o f a circuit intended for creating a resistance in it is called a
resistor.
for manufacturing a coil with a resistance of 105 fi?
General considerations formulated in Sec. 3.8 are confirmed by ex­
periments which prove that the resistance o f a conductor depends on its
temperature.
Experiment demonstrating the temperature dependence of the resistance of a wire. The
resistance of the wire increases with heating: 1 — wire, 2 — galvanic cell battery, 3 — ammeter.
Let us wind a few metres o f a thin iron wire 1 (0.1-0.2 mm in diameter)
in the form o f a spiral and connect it to a circuit containing a voltaic
cell battery 2 and ammeter 3 (Fig. 81). We choose the resistance of this
wire such that at room temperature the pointer o f the ammeter deflects
almost through the entire scale. Having marked the reading o f the instru­
ment, we strongly heat the wire with the help o f a burner. It can be seen
that as the wire becomes heated, the current in the circuit decreases, and
hence the resistance o f the wire increases. This result can be obtained not
only for iron but also for any other metal. The resistance o f metals increases with temperature. For some metals, this increase is significant. In
pure metals, for example, it attains 40-50% upon heating by 100 °C, while
for alloys the increase in resistance with temperature is less pronounced.
There are special alloys whose resistance almost does not change with in­
creasing temperature (like constantan and manganin). Constantan is used
for manufacturing some measuring instruments.
The resistance o f electrolytes varies with heating in a different way. Let
us repeat the experiment described above with an electrolyte solution in­
stead o f iron wire (Fig. 82). It will be seen that the readings o f the ammeter
increase with heating, which means that the resistance o f electrolytes
decreases with increasing tem perature. It should be noted that the
Chapter 3
Experiment demonstrating the temperature dependence of the resistance of an electrolyte. The
resistance of the electrolyte decreases with heating: I — electrolyte, 2 — galvanic cell battery,
resistance o f coal and some other materials also decreases with heating.
The temperature dependence o f metals is used in constructing resistance
thermometers. In its simplest form, such a thermometer consists o f a
platinum wire, whose resistance at various temperatures is well known,
wound on a mica plate (Fig. 83). The resistance thermometer is placed in
■l Resistance thermometer.
the body whose temperature is being measured (say, into a furnace), and
the ends o f the wire are connected to a circuit. By measuring the resistance
o f the wire, we can determine the temperature. Such thermometers are
often used for measuring very high or very low temperatures for which
mercury thermometers cannot be used.
The increment in the resistance corresponding to heating by 1 °C,
divided by the initial resistance, is called the temperature resistance coeffi­
cient and is denoted by a . Generally speaking, the temperature resistance
coefficient itself depends on temperature. The quantity a has a certain
value if we increase the temperature from 20 to 21 °C and a different value
for an increase in temperature from 200 to 201 °C. However, in many
cases the value o f a varies insignificantly over a rather wide temperature in­
terval, and we can use the mean value a m for this interval. If the resistance
o f a conductor is R0 at a temperature t0 and Rt at a temperature t, the mean
value o f a can be obtained as follows:
Normally, for R 0 we take the resistance at a temperature o f 0 °C.
Table 3 gives the values o f a m for a few conductors.
Table 3. The Mean Value of the Temperature Resistance
Coefficient for Some Conductors (in the
temperature interval from 0 to 100 °C)
Substance
Iron Tungsten
Copper
Silver
Platinum
a m. Mercury
Nickeline
Nichrome
Constantan
Manganin
a . differs from the current in the circuit after the bulb has started to glow. How will the cur­
rent change in a circuit with a carbon filament bulb and with a bulb having a metallic
filament?
use of Table 3.
A t very low temperatures, an astonishing phenomenon is observed: start­
ing from a certain “critical” temperature, the resistance o f many metals
abruptly drops to zero. This phenomenon is known as superconductivity.
The critical temperature at which superconductivity is observed is different
for different metals, but for all o f them it is close to absolute zero (see
Vol. 1). For example, it is 7.3 K (i. e. about —266 °C) for lead and 4.12 K
The resistance o f metals in the superconducting state is virtually equal
to zero. What does this mean? We know that in order to sustain current in
ordinary metals, i. e. in the presence o f resistance, electrons must be per-
Chapter 3
manently acted upon by a certain electric or extraneous force which ensures
their motion in spite o f the forces caused by collisions o f electrons with the
atoms o f the metal lattice and obstructing this motion. The required force
acting on electrons is provided by introducing an em f source into the cir­
cuit, as it was explained in detail in Sec. 3.1. Thus, necessary condition for
sustaining a current in a circuit o f conductors having a resistance is the
presence o f an em f in the circuit. As soon as the action o f the em f is stop­
ped, the current in the circuit ceases almost instantaneously.
A good illustration o f this statement is the phenomenon o f elec­
tromagnetic induction (Chap. 15). Let us suppose that a wire ring is in­
troduced into a magnetic field. When the magnetic field is switched o ff
This current, however, exists only for a short time since the induced emf
acts only at the moment when the magnetic field is switched o ff and as the
em f vanishes, the current in a conductor having a resistance ceases.
If, however, we are dealing with a superconductor whose resistance is
zero, there are no forces hindering the motion o f electrons in it. Therefore,
hence we need not maintain a potential difference between the ends o f each
segment o f the superconductor. Therefore, a source o f em f becomes un­
ly long time after the em f has stopped its action. This phenomenon was in­
deed observed in actual practice. For this purpose, the above experiment
involving the generation o f induced current was repeated, but now with the
ring made o f a lead wire cooled to the superconducting state. When the
magnetic field was switched off, and em f was induced for a short time.
However the induced current did not cease after the em f had vanished but
existed for a long time. In one such experiment, the Dutch physicist
H. Kamerlingh Onnes (1853-1926) observed an induced current existing for
four days after the magnetic field had been switched off. Naturally, all this
time the temperature o f the lead ring was maintained at about 7 K, i. e. it
remained in the superconducting state.3
For this remarkable phenomenon, the mechanical analogy with a liquid flow in pipes also
remains valid. The flow of an ordinary liquid is associated with the presence of drag due to
viscosity (internal friction) of the liquid (see Vol. 1). In order to maintain liquid flow, the re­
quired pressure drop should be ensured between the ends of any segment of a stream, and
hence a source of “watermotive force” (pump) must be included in the system. The forces
caused by this potential drop sustain the flow despite the counteraction of friction.
If, however, we use a liquid whose viscosity is virtually zero, there is no need for a
pressure drop and hence for “watermotive force” to maintain the flow of such a liquid. If we
set this inviscid liquid in a circular pipe in motion by an instantaneous impact, the liquid will4
and a half years. — Eds.
flow infinitely long although the pressure will be the same at all points of the pipe. This can
easily be explained since if there is no friction, no external force is required to maintain a
uniform motion. Thus, the inviscid liquid flow is completely similar to electric current in
superconductors. Such a liquid has been obtained. P.L. Kapitza observed that the viscosity
of liquid helium cooled to below 2.12 K (i. e. -271 °C) is negligibly low. In analogy with
superconducting metals, helium in this state was called super fluid.
In actual practice, electric circuits never consist o f homogeneous wires o f a
constant cross-sectional area but are rather systems o f different conductors
connected to one another in a certain way. How can we determine the
resistance o f a complex circuit if we know the resistance o f the conductors
constituting it?
*1 *2 Circuit diagram for mearusing the current in a circuit with
series-connected resistors /?j and R 2.
Let us consider two conductors connected in series (Fig. 84). Let the
resistances o f the individual conductors be R { and R 2. The current / is
and U2 across each conductor are different. According to Ohm’s law, we
have u x = //?„ u 2 =
ir and hence
^i = * i
u2 R2 In series connection, the voltage across each conductor is proportional to
its resistance.
The total voltage U between the beginning o f the first conductor and
the end o f the second conductor is equal to the sum o f these voltages.
Therefore,
U = I/, + U2 = IR t + IR 2 = I(R x + R 2).
If we denote by R the resistance o f the entire subcircuit consisting o f
resistors R x and R 2, then in accordance with Ohm’s law we have
U = IR.
A comparison o f the last two formulas readily gives
/? = /?, + R 2.
Chapter 3
Arguing in the same way for the case o f three, four, and in general n
conductors, we obviously obtain the following result:
R = R t + R 2 + ... + R n.
The resistance o f a subcircuit composed o f series-connected conductors
is equal to the sum o f the resistances o f individual conductors or, in short,
the resistances o f conductors connected in series are summed up.
Circuit diagram for measuring current in a circuit with parallelconnected resistors
and R 2.
Let us now consider another type o f connection o f two conductors hav­
ing resistances/?] and/?2, shown in Fig. 83, which is known as parallel con­
denote by I the current in the circuit, which is measured with an ammeter.
Entering the group o f conductors /?, and R 2, this current branches into
two, generally different, currents / , and / 2. The sum o f these currents is
equal to the current / in the circuit (Sec. 3.4):
/ = / , + / 2.
The ratio o f the currents /, and / 2 is determined by the resistances /?,
and R2. Indeed, according to Ohm’s law, the voltage across the first con­
ductor is
U t = /,/? „
while across the second conductor it is
U2 = I f *
However, these two quantities are equal since each o f them is the voltage
between the same points a and b. Thus, (/, = U2, i. e.
*2 In parallel connection, the currents in individual conductors are inversely
proportional to their resistances.
In order to determine the total resistance o f the subcircuit ab, we make
use o f relation (3.12.3):
/ = A + h
If we denote by R the total resistance o f the subcircuit ab. according to
Ohm’s law we can write
R' Comparing the last two formulas, we obtain
If we have not two but three, four, and in general n conductors, then
following the same line o f reasoning, we obtain
parallel-connected conductors. If we erect the perpendicular ac at an arbitrary point a of
the straight line ab (Fig. 86) so that its length represents the resistance R {of the first con­
ductor on a certain scale, and the perpendicular bd of length R 2 at another (arbitrary)
point b on this straight line, then the distance e f from the point e of intersection of the
straight lines ad and cb to the straight line ab is equal to the total resistance R of the
series-connected conductors:
R\Ri R = ---R l + Rl
Prove this.
resistance of 30 Q are switched on in a flat. What is the totaLresistance of the circuit?
What current is spent for feeding this circuit if the voltage is 220 V? Draw the circuit
diagram. The resistance of wires can be neglected.
Chapter 3
With the help o f the rules formulated in Sec. 3.12, we can vary the
resistance o f a circuit by connecting additional resistors to it in series or in
parallel. For this purpose, special devices, viz. rheostats, are often used. A
rheostat is a resistor with a varying resistance. Figure 87 shows the circuit
diagram and the exterior view o f a lever-operated rheostat (lever resistance
box). It consists o f a number o f series-connected wire coils made o f highresistivity alloys (nichrome, const ant an, rheotan, etc.). The ends o f the
coils are connected with metal contacts 0, 1, 2, ... over which the end o f a
movable metallic lever can slide. By moving the lever to different contacts,
we can consecutively introduce a smaller or larger number o f coils and thus
vary the resistance o f the circuit.
Lever-operated rheostat: (a) general view; (b) schematic diagram; 0-5 — ends of resistance
coils.
In order to vary the resistance more smoothly, sliding-contact rheostats
are used (Fig. 88). By mooving the slider, we can connect a larger or
smaller portion o f the rheostat winding to the circuit.
While using a rheostat, care should be taken to ensure that it is not
heated very strongly. The admissible heating does not exceed 70-80 °C, but
attempts should be made to reduce heating to the lowest possible value. To
prevent a rheostat from heating, it should be thoroughly cooled, and at the
same time, the amount o f heat liberated in the rheostat must be made as
small as possible. For strong currents, rheostats made o f thick wires are
used. For a better cooling by surrounding air, only one layer o f winding is
Sliding-contact rheostat: (a) general view; (b) circuit diagram. Winding 1 of the rheostat is
wound on a porcelain cylinder 2. Sliding contact 3 connects an arbitrary point on the winding
with rod 4 and terminals 5 and 6. The porcelain cylinder 2 of the rheostat is fixed to metal
plates 7 on which rod 4 is also mounted (on insulating flanges at terminals 5 and 6). The ends
of the rheostat winding are led to terminals 8 and 9.
wound in spirals and stretched on frames to provide sufficient cooling
from all sides. Sometimes, a flat strip is used for this purpose instead o f a
wire, which has a larger contact surface with air for the same crossectional
area and hence is cooled better.
Every circuit normally consists o f a few components (like incandescent
lamps, heating devices, or electrolytic baths) and conducting wires. These
elements and wires have a certain resistance. Therefore, there is a voltage
between the ends o f any subcircuit formed by these elements or wires.
If a current / passes through a circuit containing a number o f seriesconnected elements having the resistances R x, R 2, R 3, . . . , the voltages U x,
U2, l / j , ... between the ends o f each element will be determined by formula
The sum o f these voltages is the total voltage U applied at the ends o f the
circuit:
U = t/, + U2 + U3 + ... = R XI + R J + R J + ... .
Thus, the voltage distribution between individual series-connected
elements o f a circuit is determined only by the ratio o f the resistances o f
these elements:
U X: U 2 : U 3 '. ... = R { : R 2 : R 3
Chapter 3
Let us suppose, for example, that the generator of an electric power
plant creates a voltage U (normally, U = 220 V) across the terminals, i. e.
across the ends of the wires leading to a flat. The terminals of the leads are
connected to a bulb. Suppose that the resistance of the leads is r, the
resistance of the bulb is R , and the current passing through the bulb is /.
Then the voltage across the bulb is t/b = IR, and the voltage across the
leads is (/, = Ir. Since the voltage U = Ub + C/„ Ub = U - C/j. In other
words, the higher the voltage Ul across the leads, the lower the voltage sup­
plied to the bulb. For this reason, a loss of voltage across the leads is said to
take place. It is the higher, the larger the resistance of the leads and the
larger the current in the circuit.
In order to make the voltage loss in a transmission line lower than the
admissible limit, say, U ', the resistance of the line must be lower than the
quantity r ' = U ' / I \ where U ' is the admissible loss a n d / ' is the current.
The larger the current in the line, the smaller must its resistance be, and
hence the thicker the leads. For this reason, different conductors are used in
circuits with different duties: thin wires having a diameter of a few tenths of
a millimetre are quite suitable for electric bells and telephones (weak cur­
rents), while for industrial circuits feeding large-scale electric motors
square centimetres are required. The losses in very long lines like transmis­
sion lines connecting a hydroelectric power plant with various regions may
attain quite large values.
rent source creating a voltage of 120 V? Draw the electric diagram of connection of the
lamps.
ing through the bulb are connected in a circuit under a voltage of 220 V. What is the
voltage across the bulb filament? The resistance of the ammeter and the leads is 5 Q.
resistance is 240 Q are connected to a 220 V lighting circuit. What is the voltage across the
hot plate and across the bulb? Draw the electric diagram of the circuit.
small lamps each of which is rated for a voltage of 6 or 8 V. How many 6 V and 8 V
lamps must be taken for a garland fed by a voltage of 220 V? Will the garland glow if one
of its lamps has burnt out? What must be done in this case to repair the garland? Why
does the instruction for using garlands say that it cannot be used if more than 3-4 lamps
have burnt out?
The ends of its winding (Fig. 88) are connected to a source of voltage, and the voltage
across the terminals 8 and 5 is used in the working circuit. Explain why this is done.
Determine the voltage between these terminals if the voltage of the feeding circuit is
distance equal to 0.1 of the rheostat length; (c) closer to terminal 9, at 0.2 of the rheostat
length from it. The winding is uniform.
tric power plant with a flat is 2 km, their cross-sectional area being 15 mm2. What is the
voltage across the bulbs in this flat after an iron which consumes a current of 3 A has
been switched on, if before that the voltage was 220 V?
some devices consuming a large current (like an iron) have been switched on? Pay atten­
tion to the fact that the decrease in the brightness is especially noticeable at the initial mo­
ment: then the brightness somewhat increases although it remains lower than before. Ex­
plain the phenomenon.
consuming a current of several amperes is switched on somewhere in the flat. In this case
too a sharp decrease in the brightness is observed at the initial moment. If, however, we
take an old-type lamp with carbon filament instead of metallic one, no abrupt decrease in
brightness will be observed at the initial moment. Why is it so?
Using a galvanometer, we can measure not only the current but also the
voltage since, according to Ohm’s law, these quantities are proportional to
each other. If any two quantities are proportional to each other, both of
them can be measured with the same instrument whose scale has only to be
graduated appropriately. For example, the meter in a taxi which measures
the covered distance can be graduated in kilometres. But since the fare is
proportional to the distance, the scale of the meter is to be graduated
directly in cash so that it directly indicates the fare. Similarly, the
galvanometer scale can be graduated so that it can measure directly either
the current (in amperes) passing through the instrument or the voltage (in
volts) across its terminals. As we mentioned above, the galvanometer
graduated for current is called an ammeter, while the instrument graduated
for voltage is called a voltmeter.
Indeed, if a current I passes through a galvanometer, a certain voltage
U must exist between its input and output terminals. Suppose that the “in­
ternal” resistance of the galvanometer, i. e. the resistance of its parts
through which the current passes, is equal to R. (For permanent-magnet
galvanometers this is the resistance of the frame and the leads, while for
hot-wire galvanometers, it is the resistance of the heated wire and leads,
and so on.) According to Ohm’s law, U = IR. Thus, to each value of the
current / for a given galvanometer there corresponds a certain value of the
voltage U across its terminals. Therefore, a certain position of the pointer
can indicate either the current / or the voltage U, i. e. the instrument can be
graduated as an ammeter or a voltmeter.
Using a graduated voltmeter, we can measure the potential difference
between any two points of a circuit. Let us suppose, for example, that we
have to measure the potential difference between the terminals connected
to the filament of a bulb fed by a current source. We connect the terminals
of the bulb to the terminals m and n of a voltmeter as shown in Fig. 89. In
In order to measure the voltage across the bulb, the voltmeter should be connected in parallel
to it. U is the voltage of the current source, m and n are terminals.
other words, we connect the voltmeter in parallel to the bulb. Now the cur­
rent from the source branches, so that a part of it passes, as before,
through the bulb, and the remaining part through the voltmeter. From the
voltmeter readings, we can judge about the potential difference between
points m and n 9 and hence between the wires leading to the bulb filament.
It should be emphasized once again that in order to measure the current
in a circuit, i. e. to use a galvanometer as an ammeter, it must be connected
to the circuit in series so that the galvanometer serves as an element of a
simple unbranched circuit (Sec. 3.6). In other words, the current passing
through the galvanometer must be the same as through any other part of
this circuit. In order to measure voltage (potential difference), between
points m and n> i. e. to use a galvanometer as a voltmeter, it must be con­
the terminals of the instrument must be the same as between points m and
Can an electrometer that was used for measuring voltage be employed instead of
a voltmeter? If so, how must it be connected and graduated?
Any voltmeter is connected in parallel to the element of a circuit across
which the voltage is to be measured (Fig. 89), and hence a certain current is
branched into it from the main circuit. After the voltmeter has been con­
that we now have a different circuit of conductors consisting of the former
conductors and the voltmeter. Having connected, for example, a voltmeter
with a resistance R v in parallel to a bulb whose resistance is equal to R b, we
obtain their total resistance/? with the help of formula (3.12.5):
R = Rv + Rb
The higher the resistance R v of the voltmeter in comparison with the
resistance R b of the bulb, the smaller the difference between their total
resistance R and the bulb resistance R b and the smaller the distortion in­
troduced by the voltmeter. Thus, the resistance o f the voltm eter must be
m a d e as large as possible. For this purpose, an additional resistor whose
resistance may reach several thousand ohms is sometimes connected in
series with its measuring part (the frame, the heated wire, etc.) (Fig. 90).
An additional resistance r is connected in series to a voltmeter.
Unlike a voltmeter, an ammeter is always connected in series to a circuit
circuit is R c, the total resistance of the circuit with the ammeter becomes
According to formula (3.16.2) the instrument does not change significantly
the total resistance of the circuit, if its resistance is small in comparison
with the resistance of the circuit. Therefore, the resistance o f ammeters is
m ade very sm all (tenths or hundredths of an ohm).
it indicates a current of 10 A?
if it indicates a voltage of 120 V?
resistance must be connected to the voltmeter and in which way so that the instrument
can measure voltages up to 240 V? Draw the electric diagram of the circuit. Will the sen­
sitivity of the voltmeter in the previous problem change if this resistance is connected in
parallel to it?
ammeter measuring the current through it indicates 0.5 A. What is the resistance of the
lamp? Draw the electric diagram showing the connection of the voltmeter and ammeter.
The important examples of the application of series and parallel connec­
tion of wires are various circuits with measuring instruments. Suppose that
we have an ammeter designed for a maximum current 7max, and a larger
current has to be measured. In this case, a small resistance r, through which
the larger fraction of current will pass, is connected in parallel to the am­
meter (Fig. 91). This resistance is called a shunt, or a by-pass. We denote
the resistance o f the ammeter by R and assume that R is n times larger than
Circuit diagram of shunting an ammeter with a small
additional resistance r.
r, i. e. R /r = n. Further, let the currents in tne circuit, the ammeter and
the shunt be /, / a and / sh respectively. Then, according to formula (3.12.4),
we have
/ sh Ia = T =
or 'sh = 'a " -
Then total current / in the circuit is
+ I J l = 7a(« + 0 .
or h = i -n + -r.
Thus, the current 7a in the ammeter is l/(n + 1) of the current I in the
circuit. Consequently, with the help of the shunt we can use a given instru­
ment to measure a current which is n + 1 times stronger than the one for
which it has been designed. However, the instrument registers only
l/(n + 1) of the current being measured, i. e. its sensitivity is reduced to
this case by a factor of n + 1. If, for example, the deflection of the pointer
of an ammeter corresponds to 1 A and the resistance of the shunt is onefourth of the resistance of the instrument, the same deflection in the
presence of the shunt corresponds to a current of 5 A. Shunts are usually
chosen so that the value of a scale division increases by a factor of 10,100,
or 1000. For this purpose, the resistance of the shunt must be 1/9, 1/99 or
sensitivity of an instrument to 1/rt of its initial value, the resistance of the
shunt must be
IT -i’
The parallel connection of a shunt to a measuring instrument aimed at
reducing its sensitivity is called shunting, or by-passing.
fp for a maximum current of 10 A and having a resistance of 0.1 0. What must be the
resistance of the shunt?
Thermal Effect of Current
Heating of current-carrying conductors was experimentally investigated by
the Russian physicist E. Lenz (1804— 1865) and the English physicist
J. Joule (1818-1889). They established that the amount o f heat Q liberated
in a conductor due to the passage o f electric current is proportional to the
resistance R o f the conductor, the square o f the current I and the tim e t
during which the current is maintained. This law, known as Joule’s law,
can be expressed by the following formula:
Q = R lh,
where Q is measured in joules, R in ohms, / in amperes, and t in seconds.
The measurements leading to Joule’s law can be made by placing a con­
ductor of a known resistance R into a calorimeter (Fig. 92) and passing
through it a certain current / for a known time t. The amount of heat Q
liberated as a result can be determined from the heat balance equation, as it
is usually done in calorimetry (see Vol. 1). Carrying out the experiment for
different values of R , I and t, we obtain the dependence expressed by
Joule’s law. Using Ohm’s law, we can express the current / in terms of the
voltage U across the conductor and its resistance R . Substituting the ex­
pression / = U /R into formula (4.1.1), we obtain
Formulas (4.1.1) and (4.1.2) allow us to determine the amount of heat
liberated in individual conductors connected in series or in parallel. For a
series-connection, the same current passes through all of the conductors
the amounts of heat liberated in individual conductors. It shows that the
heat liberated in each o f series-connected conductors is proportional to its
resistance. For a parallel connection, the current in the conductors is dif­
ferent, but the voltage across their ends (at branching points) has the same
value (Sec. 3.12). Therefore, in this case formula (4.1.2) is more conve-
Chapter 4
Hh - “i Calorimeter for verifying Joule’s law.
As was shown in Sec. 3.2, a current passing through a circuit may produce
various effects. Besides the heating of conductors, chemical transforma­
tions (in the second-kind conductors) or displacements of a magnetic nee­
dle1 may take place in them. For such a displacement of the magnet, elec­
tric current does mechanical work.
In experiments carried out by Joule and Lenz, current was passed
through stationary metallic conductors. For this reason, the only result of
the passage of the current was the heating of these conductors. According
to the law of energy conservation, the entire work done by the current was
converted into heat.
We can easily calculate the work done by electric forces when a current
passes through a conductor. If the voltage (potential difference) between
the ends of the conductor is U (in volts), the work done for transporting a
charge of 1 C is numerically equal to U (in joules) (Sec. 2.10), while the
work done to transfer a charge q will be q times larger, i. e. it will be
qU[J]. If the charge q is transferred due to the passage of a current / dur­
ing time t, i. e. q = It, the work A will be equal to U lt. Thus, the work
done by the current is
A = U lt.
In the case under consideration, the entire work is converted into heat, i. e.
A = Q . Consequently, Q = U lt, and in view of Ohm’s law U = R I, we
have Q = R I 2t.
Thus, we have obtained Joule’s law theoretically by calculating the work
done by an electric current.
It should be emphasized once again that the work done by a current is
com pletely converted into heat only f o r stationary conductors o f the first
kind. If a current produces, in addition to heating, a mechanical work
converted into heat Q and partially spent on performing an external work
U, R and I has a more complicated form than for fixed metallic conductors
tion in moving conductors, see Chap. 15), the quantity /? /constituting only
a fraction of the entire quantity U. Thus, the formula Q = R P t expressing
Joule’s law is valid for calculating the amount of heat liberated by current
in all cases. However, the expression A = U lt can be applied for
estimating the amount of heat liberated in wires only when the entire work
is converted into heat, i. e. when the conductor under consideration is
heated but no motors operate and no other processes accompanied by do­
ing work occur.
If we know the work done by a current over a certain time interval, we can
calculate the power of the current. Like in mechanics, the power is defined
as the work done per unit time. It follows from the formula A = U lt for
the work done by a direct current that its power is
P = A / t = UI.
Thus, the p o w e r o f a direct current in any conductor is equal to the product
o f the current and the voltage across the conductor.
While speaking about the power of the current consumed in a circuit,
we mean that with the help of the current (“at the expense of the current”)
motors are rotated, hot plates are heated, and so on. Accordingly, power
rating, i. e. the power of the current required for the normal operation of
these devices is often given on them. For example, a 220 V hot plate having
a power of 500 W is a hot plate which consumes a current of about 2.3 A at
a voltage o f 220 V (since 2.3 A x 220 V « 500 W).
If the current in formula (4.3.1) is expressed in amperes and the voltage
in volts, we obtain power in joules per second (J/s) i. e. in watts (W) (see
Chapter 4
Vol. 1). A larger unit o f power, viz. a kilowatt, is also used in practice:
ampere in a conductor with a voltage o f one volt maintained across the
ends. In electrical engineering, the unit o f work termed kilowatt-hour is
widely used. A kilowatt-hour (kW-h) is the work done by a current having
a power o f one kilowatt during an hour. We can easily calculate that
an electric supply company is usually expressed in kilowatt-hours. Natural­
ly, this unit can be employed not only in electrical engineering but also for
estimating work done by any machine, say, a ship or a motor-car engine.
does a one-hour operation of an electric lamp cost if it consumes a current of 0.2 A at a
voltage of 220 V?
suming a power of 25 W.
the bulbs consumes a stronger current? Which of the bulbs has a higher resistance?
Determine the current and resistance of each bulb (when their filaments are red-hot).
power is consumed in this case?
while the filament of the bulb is red-hot?
them will be heated more strongly if they are connected in parallel?
voltage of 220 V? Can two 110 V bulbs rated for different powers, say, 25 and 100 W, be
connected to mains in the same way? What will be the voltage across each bulb and what
will happen?
designed for 110 V and connected in series. Can this be done if (a) the garlands are iden­
tical; (b) one garland consists of 6 V lamps while the other is made up by 8 V lamps rated
for the same power; (c) the garlands are made of 6 and 8 V lamps of different power,
selected so that the total power consumed by each garland is the same?
cloud and the Earth. The potential difference between these bodies reaches 109 volts,
while the current is 20 kA on the average. Calculate the cost of a lightning at the rate of 4
kopeck per kilowatt. Considering that 100 lightnings strike the Earth per minute, deter­
mine the total energy spent for lightnings during a year.
current through an iron wire and through a copper wire provided that the wires have the
same cross section? Consider the case when the wires are well insulated so that heat
transfer can be neglected, and the current is comparatively small and passes for a short
time so that the two wires are heated insignificantly, and the temperature resistance coef­
ficients and heat capacities can be neglected. The specific heat capacities for copper and
iron are 0.40 and 0.46 kJ/(kg • K), their densities are 8.9 x 103 and 7.9 x 103 kg/m3.
Also use Table 2 (Sec. 3.9).
Thermal effect o f current plays a significant role in modern engineering.
Let us consider some important application o f this effect.
If the resistance o f a conductor in a circuit is much higher than the
resistance o f other elements, almost the entire Joule’s heat is liberated in
this conductor. This is observed in an incandescent lamp and heating
devices whose resistance is much higher than that o f the leads. A similar
resistance distribution is employed in the so-called resistance welding which
is used for metals with a high resistivity (for example nickel, tantalum,
molybdenum, etc.).The schematic diagram o f this type o f welding is shown
in Fig. 93. Here the entire resistance o f the subcircuit is practically concen­
trated at the contact o f the parts being welded: firstly, the material o f these
parts has a high resistivity, and secondly, the contact has a large resistance
since the parts touch each other at relatively small regions (individual
spots) o f the surface. At strong currents (hundreds and thousands o f
amperes), the parts become red-hot and are welded, while copper elec­
trodes remain almost cold.
Resistance welding: 1 — thick copper plate, 2 — copper rod with a pointed end, having a large
cross section. 3 and 4 — parts being welded (say, two nickel plates slightly pressed between the
copper electrodes).
plate consists o f a ceramic plate with a trough where a heating spiral is
located. The spiral is made o f a high-resistivity material having a high
melting point (normally, o f Ni-Cr alloy or ferro-aluminium high-resistance
Chapter 4
A laboratory platinum tube furnace for
obtaining temperatures up to 1300 °C
alloy).2 The ends o f the spiral lead to contacts which are connected to the
main circuit through a power cord.
High temperatures can be attained in electric furnaces. Figure 95 shows
the schematic diagram o f a laboratory platinum tube furnace. A porcelain
tube 1 is wound by a platinum wire or strip 2. The wire is coated by a layer
o f a fire-proof material 3 (kaoline with a binder) and is fixed inside a wide
metallic shell 4 . All the space between the shell and the porcelain tube is
filled by a material 5 having a low thermal conductivity for better thermal
insulation, owing to which the heat flow from the strip is mainly directed to
tube 1 where a temperature up to 1300 °C is attained when covers 6 are
closed. Using materials with still higher resistivity instead o f platinum (say,
molybdenum), the temperature in the furnaces o f this type can be elevated
to 2500 °C.
time is required to heat 500 g of water in the kettle from 10 to 100 °C if half the heat is
lost to the surrounding space?
hour of operation of the iron cost if the price of a kilowatt-hour is 4 kopecks?
it consume the rated power (800 W) if its spiral is divided into two equal parts connected
in parallel to the circuit as shown in Fig. 96? What power will be consumed by the hot
plate if its spiral is divided into parts so that the resistance of one of them, say, abt con­
stitutes one third of the total resistance of the entire spiral adl
Ni-Cr and ferro-aluminium alloys are distinguished by a high resistivity which nearly
does not depend on temperature. Besides, these alloys are poorly oxidized at high
temperatures.
To Exercise 4.5.4.
pliances are switched on, and the electric energy spent during a three-hour operation of
all these appliances.
For the normal operation of an electric heating appliance, its winding should be designed cor­
rectly.
Let us find out the factors determining the temperature of the wire due to the passage of a
current. The liberated Joule heat does not remain within the wire but is lost because of heat
transfer (heat conduction, convection and radiation) through the surface of the wire. The
amount of heat lost as a result of heat transfer is the larger, the higher the difference between
the temperatures of the wire and of the ambient, and the faster the removal of heat by the sur­
roundings. Therefore, after the current has been switched on, the temperature of the wire
gradually increases until in a sufficiently long time it attains a constant value such that the
amount of heat liberated in the wire is exactly equal to the amount of heat lost as a result of
heat transfer. The lower the thermal conductivity of the surrounding medium, the higher the
Table 4. Maximum Admissible Load on Windings of Electric Heating
Appliances and Rheostats
M aterial
D iam eter, mm
Resistance per unit M aximum admissible
length, Q /m
load, A
Ni-Cr alloy
appliances)
Nickeline
ultimate temperature and,conversely, the higher the thermal conductivity of the medium and
the better the cooling, the lower the temperature acquired by the wire under the effect of a
given current. Thus, the temperature of the wirefor a given current is the higher the better the
thermal insulation of the wire. For this reason, an electric heating appliance should be
thoroughly insulated from all sides except that on which a high temperature of the heating ele­
ment is to be attained.
The smaller the diameter of a wire, the higher the resistance of its unit length, and hence,
according to Joule's law (4.1.1), the larger the amount of heat liberated due to a given current
per unit length of the wire. On the other hand, the thinner the wire, the smaller its surface area
and the smaller the heat transfer. Therefore, the temperature of the wirefor a given current is
the higher, the smaller its diameter.
Chapter 4
In order to avoid rapid damage of the winding of a heating element, its working
temperature must be below a certain value determined by the wire material. This means that
for a wire of a given thickness and made of a given material, there exists a certain limiting cur­
rent above which the wire is rapidly destroyed. It follows from what has been said above that
this current (‘‘maximum load”) also depends on the thermal insulation and can be con­
siderably stronger for a wire in air, which is sufficiently well cooled as a result of convection,
than for a wire enclosed, for example, in asbestos. Table 4 contains some numerical
parameters which correspond to the admissible load of a Ni-Cr wire in conventional electric
heating appliances and for nickeline wire in rheostats. The limiting load for rheostats, in­
dicated on an instrument, determines the admissible temperature above which it may become
a fire hazard.
a voltage of 220 V. Using Table 4, determine the length of a Ni-Cr wire required for this
purpose if its diameter is 0.5 mm.
Electric lighting is the most important application o f the heating action o f
current. Electric lighting was invented in 1872 by the Russian electrical
engineer and inventor A. N. Lodygin (1847-1923). He fixed a carbon rod
between two copper wires and sealed it, together with the ends o f the wires,
in a closed glass bulb (Fig. 97). When a current was passed, the rod got
Lodygin’s incandescent lamp:
heated and glowed. Lodygin also made attempts to pump air from the
bulb, although the pumps available at his time were quite imperfect.
In 1879, the American inventor T. Edison (1847-1931) constructed a
more perfect incandescent lamp by replacing the carbon rod with a charred
bamboo filament and improving evacuating technique.
In 1890, Lodygin proposed an incandescent lamp with a metallic
The higher the temperature o f the filament, the larger the portion o f the
energy emitted by it in the form o f light. In the first incandescent lamps,
however, the temperature o f the filament could not be higher than
significant advancement over the existing kerosene and other lamps, they
were found to be uneconomical: they consumed about 6 W per candela3 o f
luminous intensity. In order to increase their economic efficiency, new
materials for manufacturing filaments had to be found, which would in­
crease its temperature. At present, techniques o f manufacturing thin
uniform tungsten filament (melting point o f tungsten is 3370 °C) are highly
developed, and modern incandescent lamps mostly have tungsten
filaments.
In 1913, the American physicist and chemist I. Langmuir (1881-1937)
proposed that the bulbs o f lamps should be filled by an inert gas (argon)
which would noticeably decelerate the evaporation o f the filament.
Moreover, he suggested that the filament should be coiled to form a spiral,
owing to which heat transfer through the contact with the gas filling the
bulb could be reduced considerably, and hence the temperature o f the fila­
ment would increase. The utilization o f tungsten filaments and inert gases
made it possible to elevate the temperature o f the filament to 2400 °C, and
thus to reduce the energy expenditures to 0.6 W per candela.
cent lamp. It contains a spiral-shaped tungsten filament 7, rivetted to the
ends o f metallic terminals 2. The terminals are sealed into the glass stem 3
o f the lamp, inside which there are wires supplying current to the spiral. In
order to prevent glass from cracking as a result o f heating, the wires pass­
ing through the glass are made o f metals having the same coefficient o f
thermal expansion as that o f glass. The air is pumped out through a small
pipe 4 which is sealed after the air has been evacuated.
Modem incandescent lamp: 1 — tungsten filament, 2 —
metallic leads, 3 — glass stem, 4 — pipe for pumping air out
of the bulb, 5 — sleeve of the cap, 6 — contact.
Chapter 4
The lamp is supplied with a cap mounted on the bulb. The cap consists
o f a metal sleeve 5 with a helical trough, and a contact 6 insulated from the
sleeve. The lamp is connected to the main circuit by screwing the cap o f the
lamp into a special bulb holder. As the cap is screwed in so that the ter­
minal comes into contact with the pin o f the holder, the ends o f the fila­
ment turn out to be connected with the wires o f the main circuit.
The current in a conductor connected to a circuit is determined in accor­
dance with Ohm’s law, by the resistance o f the conductor and the voltage
across its ends. For a given voltage, the current is the smaller, the higher
the resistance o f a given conductor. For example, the resistance o f ordinary
incandescent lamps is comparatively high (hundreds o f ohms), and hence
the current through them is small (a few tenths o f an ampere).
If we connect wires by-passing the lamp, we obtain a subcircuit with a
very small resistance, and the current may become very large. A shortcircuiting is said to take place in this case. A short circuit is in general any
low-resistance connection across a current source. Large currents
developed in a short circuit are extremely dangerous and very harmful for a
current source because wires are strongly heated.
In order to prevent wires from short-circuiting, fuses are used. These
are thin copper wires (or wires made o f fusible metals like lead) connected
in series to a current-carrying circuit and designed in such a way that they
melt at a current exceeding the rated value. Figure 99 illustrates the opera­
tion o f a fuse. When wires are connected through a piece o f copper wire 1
In a short-circuiting with a copper rod I, fuse 2 melts and disconnects the circuit.
The construction o f the most widely used screw-plug cartridge fuse is
shown in Fig. 100. The term owes its origin to the porcelain plug 1 with a
A screw-plug fuse: 1 — porcelain plug, 2 — low-melting-point wire, 3 — fuse socket.
Socket outlet with a fuse: (a) top view on the open socket outlet; (b) side view from the wall;
wall, 4 — appliance for fixing the cover.
low-melting-point wire 2 inside it. The plug is screwed in the socket 3 like
the cap o f the bulb and is replaced after every short-circuiting. Normally, a
fuse or a group o f fuses is connected to the leads supplying current to a
Chapter 4
building and to each flat. Sometimes, individual boxes are supplied with
fuses. The construction o f a box fuse is shown in Fig. 101. An individual
socket fuse must melt at a current o f 3-5 A , the fuse in a flat melts at a cur­
rent o f 15-20 A, while the fuse in a building is rated for considerably
stronger currents o f a few hundred amperes.
power plant is delivered by external leads which pass through porcelain
grommet 1 into the room. Then it passes through fuses2 and is delivered to
loads: bulb 3 with switch 4, socket 5 and electric hot plate 6 connected to it.
The bulb and the socket are connected in parallel to allow them to operate
independently.
Electric wiring in the room.
It must be borne in mind that there are detailed rules which must be
observed by all persons installing wires or rearranging wiring. These rules
determine the cross section and type o f wires that should be employed in
different cases, the arrangement o f knob insulators on which wires are
fastened and the techniques o f insulating wires passing through walls.
These rules should be meticulously observed since incorrect wiring may
cause a fire.
The connection o f wires in circuits and various ways o f connecting elec­
trical appliances and machines are graphically represented on special draw­
ings called circuit diagrams. Such diagrams have been already used in the
previous section. Various elements o f the circuit have standard notations;
-h|— 'h
Notations for electric circuit diagrams: (a) simple switch; (b) socket outlet; (c) bulb; (d) fuse;
{e) connection and branching of wires; (/) resistor and potentiometer; (g) galvanometer, am­
meter, voltmeter and wattmeter; (h) battery of accumulators or galvanic cells (sources of d.c.
current); (i) d.c. source.
Schematic diagram of electric wiring shown in Fig. 102.
some o f them are represented in Fig. 103. Figure 104 shows a simple elec­
tric circuit diagram as an example.
cp is rated for 220 V, and the other two are rated for 110 V each.
Electric Current in Electrolytes
It was shown in Sec. 3.2 that when current passes through certain solutions
like dilute sulphuric acid, water is decomposed into its components, viz.
hydrogen and oxygen, which are liberated at the plates connected respec­
tively to the negative and positive terminals o f the battery. Solutions o f this
type, which are chemically decomposed by a current passing through them,
are called electrolytes, and the process o f decomposition o f a substance by
current is known as electrolysis. Henceforth, we shall call the conductors,
immersed in an electrolyte and supplying current to it, electrodes: the
positive electrode is known as anode and the negative one as cathode. 1
The products o f electrolyte decomposition, say, oxygen and hydrogen
in the experiment described in Sec. 3.2, are deposited on the electrodes as
long as the current flows. The mass o f the substance liberated at an elec­
trode can be measured. If the solution is selected in such a way that the
liberated substance is deposited on the electrode, this mass can be
measured easily. For example, if a current is passed through a copper
sulphate solution (C11SO4), copper is deposited on the cathode. H iis
phenomenon can easily be observed if the cathode is made, for example, o f
carbon: the red layer o f deposited copper is clearly seen on the black sur­
face o f carbon. By weighing the cathode before and after the experiment,
we can determine the mass o f the deposited metal quite accurately.
Measurements show that the mass o f a substance liberated at an elec­
trode depends on the current and the duration o f electrolysis. Closing the
circuit for different time intervals, we can make sure that the mass o f the
liberated substance is proportional to the time during which the current
passes. In order to investigate the dependence o f this mass on the current,
we shall proceed as follows. Let us prepare several completely identical
electrolytic baths and connect them in a circuit as shown in Fig. 105a. Since
These terms are derived from the Greek words an meaning upwards, catha meaning
downwards and odos meaning path. The terms equivalent to “upward” and “downward”
were introduced by Faraday (not very correctly) to emphasize the opposite directions of the
motion of particles.
Schematic diagram for the experiment establishing the dependence of the mass of liberated
substance on the current: (a) the current between electrolytic baths I and II is distributed be­
tween two identical baths 1 and 2; (b) the current between baths I and II is distributed among
three identical baths 1, 2, and 3.
the process is steady-state (Sec. 3.4), the same current passes through baths
the baths are identical, the currents through baths 1 and 2 are obviously
equal, and hence each o f them is equal to half the current passing through
bath I or II. Similarly, branching the current through three identical baths
third o f the current passing through bath I or II, and so on. By measuring
the mass o f the substance (for example, copper or silver) liberated in each
bath we see that the masses o f the substance liberated in baths 1 and 2 {ox 1,
mass o f the substance liberated in the bath I or II. The experiment shows
that the mass o f the liberated substance is proportional to the current.
Thus, the mass o f the substance liberated in electrolysis is proportional
to the current and duration o f the process, i. e. to their product. But ac­
cording to (3.4.1), this product is equal to the charge that has passed
through the electrolyte. Consequently, the mass o f the substance liberated
at an electrode is proportional to the charge, or the amount o f electricity
that has passed through the electrolyte. This important law was established
for the first time by Faraday and is known as Faraday’s first law o f elec­
trolysis.
If m is the mass o f the deposited substance, I is the current, t is the time
o f the electrolysis and q is the total charge that passes through the bath dur­
ing the time t, Faraday’s first law can be written as follows:
m = K q = K it,
where K is the proportionality factor. Assuming in this formula that the
charge q = 1 C, we find that the coefficient K is equal to the mass o f the
substance liberated by a charge o f 1 C or, in other words, the mass o f the
substance liberated by a current o f 1 A during 1 s.
Faraday’s studies showed that the value o f K is characteristic o f each
material. For example, in the electrolysis o f silver nitrate (A gN 03), a
charge o f 1 C liberates 1.1180 mg o f silver. The same amount o f silver is
liberated by 1 C in the electrolysis o f any silver salt, for example, silver
chloride (AgCl), and so on. The mass o f a substance liberated in the elec­
trolysis o f a salt o f another metal will be different. The quantity K is called
the electrochemical equivalent o f a given substance. Thus, the elec­
trochemical equivalent o f a substance is the mass o f this substance
liberated in electrolysis when one coulomb o f electricity has passed through
the solution.
Table 5 contains the values o f electrochemical equivalent for a few
materials.
Table 5. Electrochemical Equivalent
Some Substances
Substance
Silver (Ag)
Hydrogen (H)
Copper (Cu), bivalent
monovalent
Zinc (Zn)
for K, 10" 6 kg/C
Table 5 shows that electrochemical equivalents o f different materials differ
considerably. What properties o f a substance determine its electrochemical
equivalent?
The answer to this question is provided by the following important law,
which was also established experimentally by Faraday {Faraday’s second
law): the electrochemical equivalents o f various substances are propor­
tional to their molar masses and inversely proportional to their valences.2
In order to explain this law, let us consider the following example. The
molar mass o f silver is 0.1079 kg/m ole, and its valence is equal to one. The
It should be recalled that the valence of any atom is determined by the number of
hydrogen atoms that can combine with the given atom or which can be substituted by this
atom. For example, chlorine and silver are monovalent (in HC1 and AgCl), zinc and oxygen
are bivalent (in ZnO and H20), and so on. The valence of hydrogen is assumed to be equal to
unity.
molar mass o f Zn is 0.0654 k g/m ole and its valence is equal to two.
Therefore, according to Faraday’s second law, the ratio o f electrochemical
equivalents o f silver and zinc is
According to Table 5, the experimental values o f electrochemical
equivalents for silver and zinc are 1.118 x 10“ 6 and 0.3388 x 10- 6 kg/C
respectively. Their ratio is 1.118/0.3388 = 3.30, which agrees with Fara­
day’s second law.
If we denote, as before, the electrochemical equivalent o f a substance
through K [kg/C], its molar mass by M [kg/mole] and its valence by n
K . - L . M .
Here 1 /F denotes the proportionality factor which is a universal constant,
i. e. has the same value for all substances. The quantity F is known as Fara­
day's constant. Its value, which was determined experimentally, is
F = 96 484 C /m ole.
Some elements have different valences in different compounds. Copper, for instance, is
monovalent iq cuprous chloride (CuCl), cuprous oxide (Cu20 ) and in some salts, but it is
bivalent in cupric chloride (CuCl2), cupric oxide (CuO), copper sulphate (CuSO^ and some
other compounds. In electrolysis of a solution with monovalent copper, 1 C always liberates
amount of copper, viz. 0.3294 mg. Therefore, copper has two values of electrochemical
equivalent (Table 5).
The ratio o f the molar m ass o f a substance to its valence, M / n , is called
the chemical equivalent o f the given substance. This ratio indicates the
mass o f a given substance required for substituting a mole o f hydrogen in
chemical compounds.3 For monovalent substances, the chemical
equivalent is numerically equal to the molar mass. Using this concept, we
can express Faraday’s second law as follows: electrochemical equivalents
o f substances are proportion al to their chemical equivalents.
Combining formulas (5 .1 .1 ) and (5.2.1), we can write both Faraday’s
laws in the form
m = It should be recalled that a mole is the amount of substance in which the number of
atoms or molecules is equal to Avogadro’s number NA = 6.02 x 1023 mole” 1 (see Vol. 1).
Chapter 5
where m is the mass o f the substance liberated upon the passage o f the
amount o f electricity q through an electrolyte. This formula has a simple
physical meaning. Let us put in this formula m = M / n , i. e. take the mass
o f a substance equal to its chemical equivalent. Then F = q: This means
that the Faraday constant F is numerically equal to the charge q that must
be passed through any electrolyte to liberate at the electrodes the amount
o f substance equal to its chemical equivalent.
can we judge whether or not there is a voltage between them? Water that has not been
subject to special thorough purification always contains various salts in solution and is a
conductor.
which is negative, the wires connected to the terminals are immersed in a glass of water,
and the evolution of gas at the wires is observed. How can we say which of the terminals
is negative?
amounts of each of these substances will be liberated if a current of 5 A is passed through
the electrolytes for 10 hours?
electrochemical equivalent of chlorine. The valence of chlorine is equal to one, and the
relative atomic masses of chlorine and hydrogen are 35.45 and 1.008.
The very fact o f decomposition o f electrolytes under the effect o f current
passing through them indicates that the motion o f charges in them is
associated with the motion o f atoms or groups o f atoms bound to each
other (S 0 4, NOa, etc.). These atoms or groups o f atoms are parts o f
molecules o f the dissolved substance. It is natural to assume that it is these
parts o f molecules that are charge carriers. Their motion under the action
o f electric field forces constitutes the electric current passing through an
electrolyte.
It was found that as current passes through an electrolyte, substances
are liberated at both electrodes. In chemical composition, these are dif­
ferent parts o f molecules o f the dissolved substance. The amounts o f the
deposited substances (measured in chemical equivalents) are equal. Ob­
viously, their charges are opposite.
It was mentioned earlier (Sec. 1.5) that charged atoms are called ions.
The same term is applied to charged molecules or their parts. Consequent­
ly, we can state that conduction in electrolytes is ionic, i. e. is due to the
motion o f positive and negative ions in them. These ions are formed by
decomposition o f neutral molecules into two parts having equal and op­
posite charges. Molecules o f a dissolved substance, which were electrically
s~\ o o o O °
O0 -0 ® oe o
The conductivity of an electrolyte depends on the presence of positive and negative ions
”): (a) the circuit is disconnected, current is absent; (b) the cir­
cuit is closed, and an ion current passes through the electrolyte.
can move independently o f each other.
These ideas are illustrated by Fig. 106. Positive and negative ions o f a
dissolved substance are schematically represented by circles with “ + ” or
“ —” signs. As long as the field between A and C is absent, these ions as
well as other molecules in the solution are in random thermal motion
either direction, i. e. there is no electric current or a predominant charge
transfer in a certain direction. When a potential difference is applied be­
tween the electrodes A and C, an electric field is produced in the elec­
trolyte, and an ordered motion o f unlike ions in opposite directions
superimposed on the random motion (Fig. 106b).
Having reached the cathode, positive ions acquire missing electrons and
are liberated in the form o f neutral atoms, while the electrons that have
the battery. Similarly, negative ions reaching the anode give away their ex­
cess electrons and become neutral atoms, while the electrons pass through
metal wires to the battery. Thus the current in an electrolyte is due to the
motion o f p ositive and negative ions.
This concept o f electrolysis is confirmed by numerous facts. From this
point o f view, Faraday’s first law (Sec. 5.1) is given the following simple
explanation. Each ion that has been deposited on an electrode carries a cer­
tain electric charge. This means that the total charge carried by all ions
must be proportional to the total number o f ions deposited on the elec­
trodes, i. e. to the mass o f the liberated substance. This is just Faraday’s
first law. Faraday’s second law, which allows us to calculate the electric
charge associated with each ion (Sec. 5.5), is also explained by this theory
in a simple and natural way.
Chapter 5
It should be noted that the term “ion” was introduced by Faraday
deposited on the cathode were called cations by Faraday, while ions
deposited on the anode were called anions.
Experiments show that hydrogen and metals are always deposited on
the cathode. This means that hydrogen and metals form positive ions in
electrolytes.
•) this phenomenon using the ion conduction concept.
damp rooms are in addition impregnated by tar?
hands?
In certain cases, it is possible to observe visually the motion o f ions in elec­
trolytes.
Let us impregnate a sheet o f Alter paper with an electrolyte solution
plate (Fig. 107). W e put an ordinary white thread impregnated with sodium
An experiment proving the motion of ions. A sheet of filter paper is impregnated by solutions
of electrolyte and phenolphthalein. ab is a thread wetted by electrolyte solution.
hydroxide (NaO H ) across the paper. The paper under the thread acquires a
crimson colour as a result o f interaction o f hydroxyl ions (OH) with
phenolphthalein. Then we press wire electrodes against the sheet o f filter
paper near its ends, connect them to a galvanic cell, and switch on the cur­
rent. Hydroxyl ions o f sodium hydroxide start to move towards the anode,
imparting a crimson colour to the paper. From the velocity o f motion o f
the crimson edge, we can judge about the mean velocity o f motion o f the
ions under th e action o f the electric field in the electrolyte. Experiments
show that th is velocity is proportional to the field strength in the elec­
trolyte. For a given field, the velocity o f different ions is different. In
general, it is not very high and for moderate fields it is just a few hundredths
or even thousandths o f a centimetre per second.
source. They consist of a small glass ampoule with two wires soldered into it (Fig. 108).
To Exercise 5.4.1.
The ampoule is filled with a solution of common salt and phenolphthalein which
becomes crimson under the action of an alkali. Which of the terminals will produce crim­
son colour?
Formula (5.2.2) combining the two Faraday’s laws implies that if the
charge q is numerically equal to Faraday’s constant F, the mass m is equal
to M / n . In other words, when a charge o f 96 484 C passes through an elec­
trolyte, M / n kg o f any substance is liberated, which is equal to l / n mole o f
this substance. Therefore, in order to liberate a mole o f a substance, a
charge q numerically equal to, nF C must be passed through the electrolyte.
Thus, when a mole o f a monovalent substance is to be liberated (1.008 g o f
hydrogen, 22.99 g o f sodium, 107.87 g o f silver, and so on), a charge
when a mole o f a bivalent substance (16.00 g o f oxygen 65.38 g o f zinc,
It is well known that a mole o f any substance contains the same number
o f atoms, equal to Avogadro’s constant N A = 6.02 x 1023 m ole- 1 . Thus,
every ion o f a monovalent substance, having precipitated on an electrode,
carries the charge
e = F _ = 1.60 X 1 0 - ,9C.
NA For liberating an atom o f a bivalent substance, a charge twice as large
and so on. Generally, for the liberation o f each atom o f an n-valent
substance, a charge nF/NA = ne must be transferred through an elec­
trolyte.
Thus, the charges transferred in electrolysis by each ion are integral
multiples o f a certain minimum amount o f electricity equal to
this charge. Any bivalent ion (of zinc, mercury, etc.) carries twice this
charge. But a case when an ion carries a charge equal to a fraction of
Chapter 5
and physiologist G. Helmholts (1821-1894), who paid attention to this co­
rollary o f Faraday’s law, drew the conclusion that 1.6 x 10“ 19 C o f elec­
tricity is the minimum amount o f electricity existing in nature, and this
minimum charge became known as the elementary charge. Monovalent
anions (chlorine ions, iodine ions, etc.) bear a negative elementary charge,
while monovalent cations (ions o f hydrogen, sodium, potassium, silver,
etc.) bear a positive elementary charge, bivalent anions carry two negative
elementary charges, bivalent cations carry two positive elementary charges,
and so on.
Thus, studying phenomena involving electrolysis, the researchers for
the first time came across the manifestations o f the discrete nature o f elec­
tricity (Sec. 1.5) and managed to determine the elementary electric charge.
Later, other phenomena in which the discrete nature o f electricity is ex­
hibited were discovered and other methods o f measuring the elementary
measurements resulted in the same value for the electron charge as that ob­
tained from Faraday’s law. This is the best verification o f the correctness
o f the ion mechanism o f the passage o f current through electrolytes, which
was described in the previous section.
Ions are denoted by convention by signs “ + ” or “ —” on the corre­
sponding chemical symbols (normally, as superscripts). The number of
these signs is equal to the valence o f an ion (for example, copper ions can
be o f the type C u ^ or Cu2+, while chlorine ions can only be o f the type
Cl“ , and so on).
The concepts of the ionic conduction of electrolytes formulated above imply that the primary
result of electrolysis is the deposition of the components of solute molecules on the electrodes.
However, in actual practice we often observe on one or both electrodes not the atoms or
groups of atoms which moved in a solution and were initially deposited on the electrodes but
other atoms or atomic groups liberated in secondary chemical reactions in which primary
atoms or atomic groups participate. For example, during the electrolysis of copper sulphate
solution (CuSO^, as was mentioned earlier, copper is deposited on the cathode, while at the
anode we can observe the liberation of oxygen rather that the S 04 group. At the same time,
the formation of sulphuric acid (HjSO^ is observed in the solution. This can be explained by
the fact that the S 04 group is unstable. Having precipitated from the solution, it immediately
enters into the following reaction with water:
Oxygen is liberated in the form of gas bubbles, while sulphuric acid remains in the solution.
Similar secondary reactions take place in electrolysis of other salts and acids. For example,
it was shown above that during the electrolysis of a weak solution of sulphuric acid, hydrogen
and oxygen are liberated at the electrodes. But as in the example considered above, this
ultimate result is a consequence of secondary chemical reactions which are superimposed on a
simple primary process and make electrolysis more complicated. At first, hydrogen is
liberated at the cathode in the form of gas bubbles, while the S04 group is liberated at the
anode. This group immediately enters into a reaction with water according to the above equa­
tion, and as a result the sulphuric acid molecule is recreated, and oxygen which is a constituent
of water is liberated at the anode. It appears that the process occurs so that the amount of
sulphuric acid remains unchanged in the solution, while the amount of water decreases.
Therefore, in this case, like in the electrolysis of many other acids and bases, it is often said
that water is decomposed by electric current, or undergoes electrolysis. This is not entirely
true. The term “electrolysis of water” rather reflects the ultimate result but obscures the
distinction between the primary process, which is directly associated with the passage of cur­
rent through an electrolyte, and the secondary chemical reactions between the products of the
primary process.
The distinction between the primary and secondary processes in electrolysis can be
demonstrated with the help of the following experiment. We carry out the electrolysis of a
common salt (NaCl) solution with the electrodes in the form of copper plates. We observe the
liberation of hydrogen and the formation of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) at the cathode and the
formation of cuprous chloride (CuCl), a compound of chlorine with the metal of the anode, at
the anode. It can easily be shown, however, that all these products are the results of the secon­
dary reactions in which parts of sodium chloride molecules liberated at the electrodes (sodium
at the cathode and chlorine at the anode) participate.
In order to verify that the primary process is just the liberation of sodium and chlorine at
the electrodes, let us repeat this experiment using a carbon rod as the anode and a layer of li­
quid mercury poured at the bottom of the electrolytic cell as the cathode (Fig. 109). Chlorine
NaCl solutic
The electrolysis of a common salt solution. Chlorine is
liberated at the anode and sodium at the cathode.
liberated at the anode does not react with carbon and is liberated in the form of gas bubbles.
Sodium is deposited on the cathode. True, we cannot directly observe sodium since its atoms
precipitated on the mercury surface immediately leak (diffuse) into the bulk of mercury.
However, they can be detected quite easily. It is sufficient to distil the mercury for some time
after the passage of the current or, which is simpler, just to spill hot water over it. In this case,
sodium enters into a chemical reaction with water according to the following equation
Hydrogen bubbles are liberated on the surface of mercury, while sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is
dissolved in water, imparting alkali properties to it: a red litmus paper immersed in water
becomes blue. Thus, having chosen the electrodes properly, we can observe the deposition of
primary products of electrolysis,i. e. sodium and chlorine.
Chapter 5
It is important to note, however, that Faraday's laws remain in force irrespective o f
whether primary products of electrolysis or the products of secondary reactions are deposited
on the electrodes. For example, for the liberation of a mole of hydrogen, a charge of 96 484 C
must be passed through an electrolyte irrespective of whether hydrogen is a primary product
trolysis of common salt NaCl). This becomes completely clear when we recall that every atom
of a substance, deposited on an electrode, may enter into a chemical reaction and substitute an
atom or a group of atoms of the same valence, or several atoms the sum of whose valences is
equal to the valence of the given atom.
It follows from what has been said earlier that the concept o f ion conduc­
tion indeed helps to explain electrolysis in a simple way. But where do ions
come from in electrolyte if the molecules o f a solute were electrically
applied electric field or do they exist in the electrolyte from the very outset,
before the circuit has been closed?
Simple experiments show that the decomposition o f molecules into
charged ions is not associated with the presence o f current. Indeed, if
molecules were to be dissociated by an external electric field, there had to
exist a minimum electric Held strength in an electrolyte required for the ini­
tiation o f electrolysis and depending on the strength o f the molecular
bonds. Experiments show, however, that this is not so and electrolysis
starts at any, however, small value o f the field strength. This can be
verified, for example, by carrying out electrolysis o f copper sulphate with
copper electrodes, when there is no distortion due to the polarization o f
electrodes (Sec. 6.4) which takes place, for example, in the electrolysis o f
acidified water. Experiments o f this type indicate that ions appear not
under the action o f a current but are formed in the process o f dissolution o f
a substance. The formation o f ions during dissolution is known as elec­
trolytic dissociation.
Dissolution is not always accompanied by the dissociation into ions,
and for this reason not all solutions are conductors o f current. The follow­
ing experiment visually demonstrates this distinction.
Let us connect in series an electric bulb and two electrodes placed into a
vessel containing distilled water and then connect them to the lighting
system. The bulb will not glow since distilled water practically does not
conduct electric current: only an insignificant amount o f impurities is
dissolved in it, while water molecules themselves are almost undissociated.
We now drop a pinch o f sugar into water. The solution will remain non­
conducting. This means that sugar molecules are not dissociated during the
dissolution. If, however, we dissolve a pinch o f common salt or a few
drops o f hydrochloric acid instead o f sugar, the bulb begins to glow
Aqueous solution of an acid or a salt conducts electric current.
trolytic dissociation takes place in it. Naturally, the bulb in this experiment
is just an indicator o f current and can be replaced by a measuring instru­
ment.
The idea of electrolytic dissociation accompanying dissolution was introduced by the
Swedish physicist and chemist S. Arrhenius (1859-1927). He provided the following explana­
tion for the distinction between electrolytes and nonelectrolytes as well as for the fact th$it
aqueous solutions of electrolytes are especially good conductors of electricity. Electrolytes in­
clude the substances whose molecules are composed of positively and negatively charged
atoms bound by the forces of electric interaction. However, according to formula (2.25.4), the
force of interaction between two charges in a medium with permittivity e decreases by a factor
of e. Therefore, in a solvent with a high permittivity (e = 81 for water), the forces binding
ions in a molecule become much weaker. Under the effect of perpetual thermal collisions,
molecules formed by such weakly bound ions are “split” into charged particles—ions, i. e.
undergo electrolytic dissociation.
electrolyte appear neutral to us although it contains charged ions?
traction into neutral molecules? What sustains ionization in an electrolyte all the time?
Electrolysis provides a convenient method o f measurement o f the charge
that has passed through a certain part o f a circuit. For this purpose, we
must connect into this subcircuit an electrolytic bath (say, for obtaining
silver) and measure the mass o f the substance deposited on the electrodes.
io» Chapter 5
The quotient o f the mass o f the precipitate and its electrochemical
equivalent is equal to the charge that has passed through the subcircuit.
In order to determine the current in a circuit, it is sufficient to deter­
mine the mass deposited on the electrodes and the time during which the
precipitate was formed. If the current did not change over this time inter­
val, the ratio o f the mass o f the precipitate to the time and the
elecrochemical equivalent gives the current in the circuit.
Thus, Faraday’s first law allows us to reduce the measurement o f cur­
rent to the measurement o f mass and time, i. e. to very simple and highly
accurate operations.
O f course, it would be easier to take for the unit o f electricity (and ac­
cordingly for the unit o f current) the quantity which causes the liberation
o f a unit mass o f a substance, say, 1 g or 1 mg o f silver in electrolysis.4
However, it has been agreed to take a coulomb as the unit o f electric
charge. For this reason, accurate and complex experiments were required
to establish electrochemical equivalents. Using these equivalents, we can
measure with the help o f electrolysis the charge in the units that have been
already chosen, viz. coulombs, and the current in amperes.
Using the established values o f electrochemical equivalents, we can
graduate ammeters (galvanometers) o f any construction with a high degree
o f accuracy. For this purpose, it is sufficient to connect an electrolytic bath
and an ammeter in series and pass a constant current through them for a
known time interval (the constancy o f the current can be controlled by the
constant reading o f the ammeter) and then determine the mass o f the
deposited substance by weighing. If we know the electrochemical
equivalent, we can determine the amount o f electricity that has passed
through the circuit in coulombs, and dividing the value o f the charge by the
time t, find the current in amperes. Naturally, this technique is used in
practice only for graduating standard ammeters. If we have such
thoroughly graduated instruments at our disposal, we can graduate any
ammeter by connecting it in series with a standard ammeter. However, the
electrolytic method o f graduating can always be used to verify the readings
o f a standard ammeter if its accuracy is doubtful.
Electrolysis has numerous technical applications.
Electrolytic m ethod o f obtaining pure metals. An illustrative exam­
ple o f this is the electrolytic purification, or refining, o f copper. Copper
should be taken equal to the amount of electricity which liberates in electrolysis of water one
hundredth of a cubic inch of fire-damp. After recalculation for modern units, this amount of
electricity approximately equals 0.7 C.
ores contain compounds o f copper with sulphur, oxides as well as im­
purities o f foreign metals (Ni, Pb, Sb, As, Bi, and others). Copper ob­
tained directly from an ore and containing impurities is cast in the form o f
plates and placed as the anode in a solution o f C uS04. By selecting an ap­
propriate voltage (0.20-0.25 V) across the bath electrodes, we can ensure
that only metallic copper is deposited on the cathode. Foreign impurities
either go into the solution (without being deposited on the cathode) or set­
tle down at the bottom o f the bath (anode slag).
Electrolytic extraction o f metals can be carried out not only from
aqueous solutions but also from melts o f these substances which in the
solid state are made up o f ions (like NaCl). As a result o f melting, their ions
acquire the necessary mobility. Electrolysis o f melts forms the basis o f a
process o f extraordinary technical importance (Fig. 111), viz. the obtaining
£ 3 $—
Obtaining of metallic aluminium by electrolysis of molten bauxites containing aluminium ox­
ide: 1 — carbon anodes, 2 — bottom and walls of a carbon electrolytic bath, which serve as a
cathode.
o f metallic aluminium from bauxites containing A120 3. Since very large
currents are employed in these processes, the heat liberated, in accordance
with Joule’s law, turns out to be sufficient for maintaining the substance in
the molten state.
Obtaining metals with the help o f electrolysis (electrometallurgy) plays
an exceptionally important role in nonferrous metallurgy. At the present
time, aluminium is produced exclusively by electrolytic methods. Giant
plants were set up for obtaining aluminium. The energy spent annually all
over the world for electrometallurgy amounts to billions o f kilowatt-hours.
What is the surface area of the electrodes required for this purpose? Electrolytic produc­
tion of aluminium is carried out at a voltage of about 5 V and a current density of about
Chapter 5
Electroplating. Using electrolysis, metal objects can be coated with a
layer o f some other metal. This process is known as electroplating.
Technologically, the most important application is electroplating with
poorly oxidized metals (in particular, nickel and chromium plating) as well
as silver and gold plating for protecting metals from corrosion in air.
In order to obtain a required coating, the object is thoroughly cleaned
mechanically, degreased and used as the cathode in an electrolytic bath
containing a salt o f the metal with which the object should be plated.
Electrolytic nickel plating: 1 — nickel anodes, 2 — an object being nickel plated, which serves
as a cathode.
o f nickel salts are used as electrolytes. In order to make plating more
uniform, it is expedient to employ two plates as an anode, placing the ob­
ject between them.
commonly used. What must be the duration of electrolysis in order to obtain a nickel
layer 0.02 mm thick? The density of nickel is 8.8 x 103 kg/m3. The value of the elec­
trochemical equivalent for nickel, which is required for solving the problem, must be
calculated proceeding from the fact that nickel is bivalent, and its relative atomic mass is
whose area is 50 cm2, if the thickness of the nickel layer must be 0.02 mm. What must be
the duration of the electroplating for the current density of 30 A/m2.
Galvanoplasty (electroforming). Using electrolysis, it is possible not
only to coat objects by a layer o f a metal, but also to prepare their relief
metallic copies (like coins, medals, and so on). This process was developed
by the Russian physicist and electrical engineer B. S. Yakobi (1801-1874)
in 1840’s and is referred to as galvanoplasty. In order to manufacture a
relief copy o f an object, a cast o f the object is first made with a plastic
material like wax. This cast is made electroconducting by coating it with
graphite, and then immersed in an electrolytic bath as a cathode. The layer
o f a metal o f required thickness is deposited on the cast during electrolysis.
Electroforming has an important application in printing, in electroty­
ping. In this process, an ordinary set o f a text is first made, and then a cast
o f wax or plastic is manufactured for it. After coating the cast with
graphite, it is placed in an electrolytic bath, where a thick layer o f copper is
deposited on it. For strengthening this layer, the back side o f the copy is
covered by “printing metal.5” The obtained relief copy o f the set is then
used for printing.
s ..Printing metal” is a lead-based low-melting-point alloy.
Chemical and Thermal Generators
It was shown in Chap. 3 that a continuous current can be maintained in a
circuit o f conductors having a resistance only provided that a generator,
viz. a source o f emf, operates in the circuit. When a current passes through
a circuit, energy is continuously liberated, for example, in the form o f heat
warming the conductors. This energy is supplied by the generator as a
result o f certain processes which can be quite diverse. Accordingly,
generators o f emf can also be o f different types. In Sec. 3.1, a Wimshurst
machine was used as a generator, which operated at the expense o f the
energy used for running the engine (for example, the muscle energy). It was
also pointed out that the amounts o f electricity separated by this machine
per second are fairly small. For this reason, such a machine cannot sustain
a strong current in a circuit.
The tirst emf generator which made it possible to study electric current
and use it for practical purposes was the Galvanic cell in which the energy
liberated in a current circuit is obtained at the expense o f the energy
liberated in chemical reactions accompanying the cell operation.
This chemical generator was constructed by the Italian physicist
A. Volta (1745-1827). Volta established that the separation o f electric
charges (emergence o f an emf) takes place when different conductors are
brought in contact. As a result o f the contact, negative charges accumulate
at the contact boundary in one metal (excess o f electrons), while positive
charges appear in the other metal (deficiency o f electrons).
The Galvanic cell is called after the Italian physician and anatomist L. Galvani
that a freshly prepared leg of a frog suspended on a copper hook from an iron bar contracted
every time when it was connected to the iron bar through an iron rod (Fig. 113). Since it had
been already known that a prepared frog’s leg contracts when an electric charge is passed
through it (say, during a discharge of a Leyden jar), Galvani correctly attributed the observed
phenomenon to the action of a discharge. However, he erroneously supposed that electric
charges were generated as a result of some vital processes in the frog’s leg. With the help of
physical experiments, Volta established that this phenomenon is associated with the presence
of two different metals (copper hook and iron bar) in contact with electrolytes (liquid in the
frog’s leg and the layer of moisture covering all metal objects in ordinary conditions).
Therefore, the frog’s leg just played the role of a sensitive instrument detecting the presence of
current.
An experiment made by Galvani. Lumbar nerves of a frog are connected to a brass hook I
hanging on an iron rod 2. When the muscles of the frog’s legs are connected to rod 2 through
an iron rod 3, they abruptly contract.
The phenomenon discovered by Galvani and Volta, which consists in
charge separation, i. e. the emergence o f an emf at the interface between
two conductors, was used in constructing a Galvanic cell. It was established
by Volta, however, that if a circuit is formed only by the first-kind conduc­
tors (carbon and metals) which do not experience any chemical transforma­
tions when a current passes through them (Sec. 3.2), a galvanic cell can be
obtained. This is confirmed by the following experiment.
We twist two pieces o f copper wire to the ends o f an iron wire and join
the free ends o f the copper wire to a sensitive galvanometer (Fig. 114). We
No current emerges in a closed circuit made by first-kind conductors only; a and b are
soldered junctions of two metals.
Chapter (
obtain a closed circuit consisting o f the iron wire, the two copper wires and
a wire (in the form o f a thread or a coil) constituting the main part o f the
galvanometer. Thus, the circuit as a whole consists only o f metals (firstkind conductors). In these conditions, even a very sensitive galvanometer
does not detect a current. No current will be observed if we replace the iron
wire by a wire made o f zinc or some other metal or if instead o f twisting the
ends o f wires we solder them, i. e. introduce a third metal, viz. tin, or if we
construct a more complex circuit containing not two but three, four, or any
bitrary number o f different metals, the e m f is equal to zero (Volta’s rule).
Volta’s rule is closely related to the fact that metals (which are firstkind conductors) do not experience any chemical change as a result o f the
passage o f current (Sec. 3.2). If Volta’s rule were not observed, it would be
possible to construct a circuit in which current would flow for a long time
and could do work o f a certain kind, for instance rotate a motor, without
decreasing the energy stored in this circuit. Indeed, the internal energy o f
such a circuit could not decrease since the substances constituting it
changed and no heat is supplied to the circuit from outside, no work can be
done in accordance with the energy conservation law, i. e. a current cannot
be sustained in the circuit for a long time.
It is not difficult to explain why there is no current in a circuit com­
posed o f first-kind conductors or, in other words, why the em f is equal to
zero although, as was mentioned above, an emf emerges at the junctions o f
different metals. In such a circuit, there are several (at least two) junctions
o f different metals (Fig. 115). Consequently, several different emf’s acting
Circuits made up of a few first-kind conductors: (a) the junction of two different conductors;
in the circuit in different directions (and different in sign) appear so that
the resultant em f is equal to the algebraic sum o f individual em f’s. Since
experiments show that there is no current in such a circuit (which could be
predicted from the energy conservation law), the algebraic sum o f all the
emf's in the closed circuit form ed by the first-kind conductors is equal to
zero. The situation, however, radically changes if at least one o f the subcir­
cuits is a second-kind conductor. A change in the chemical composition o f
this conductor due to the passage o f current may give rise to a number o f
chemical transformations as a result o f which the internal (chemical)
energy o f the bodies constituting the circuit decreases, and current can be
maintained in the circuit at the expense o f this decrease in energy. Indeed,
by dipping a copper and a zinc plate in sulphuric acid solution, Volta
realized the first galvanic cell also known as a voltaic cell (Fig. 116). By
Voltaic cell. Two different metals (copper and zinc) of the circuit
are in contact with an electrolyte (sulphuric acid solution).
connecting the copper and zinc plates (electrodes) o f a voltaic cell through
a conductor (say, a metal wire), we obtain an electric current in this closed
circuit.
A voltaic cell contains all the elements required for any galvanic cell,
viz. two different first-kind conductors (zinc and copper) in contact with a
second-kind conductor (sulphuric acid solution). However, for reasons
which will be clarified in Sec. 6.4, this cell is not convenient since its emf,
which amounts to 1.1 V at the beginning o f operation, rapidly decreases.
For this reason, other cells are usually employed in actual practice, which
differ from the voltaic cell in the choice o f the first- and second-kind con­
ductors.
The plates o f a galvanic cell, between which a potential difference ap­
pears, are known as poles (or electrodes). The pole with a higher potential
is called the positive pole, or anode, while the other pole is negative
The Daniell cell is frequently used, in which copper immersed in copper
sulphate forms the positive electrode while a zinc plate dipped in zinc
sulphate or sulphuric acid serves as the negative electrode. Usually
electrode 4 is surrounded by Z nS 04 solution while the copper electrode 2 is
surrounded by C u S 04 solution. In order to prevent the solutions from mix­
ing rapidly, they are separated by a porous partition 3 made o f unbaked
Chapter 6
Daniell cell: individual parts (left) and assembled cell (right).
clay. Such a construction, which will be explained below (Sec. 6.5), ensures
a long-term and uniform operation o f the Daniell cell in contrast to
galvanic cell. The emf o f the Daniell cell is 1.09 V.
It will be shown in Sec. 6.4 that secondary processes occur in most o f
galvanic cells when they are used for a long time, and this reduces the
voltage produced by a cell. However, some galvanic cells are distinguished
for their exceptionally constant voltage and hence are widely applicable in
electrical measurements as standard e.m .f. sources. Such cells are
manufactured according to exact procedures established by international
agreements which determine the chemical composition and concentrations
o f their electrolytes. They are known as standard, or normal, cells. At pres­
ent, the Weston standard cell, which gives a voltage o f 1.0187 V at 18 °C,
is the one used most often.
It should be noted that the emf o f a galvanic cell is determined only by
the choice o f metals and electrolytes and is completely independent o f the
area o f the electrodes in contact with an electrolyte. The reasons behind
this will become clear when we analyze the process o f emergence o f an emf
in a cell.
It can easily be seen that one o f the electrodes in a galvanic cell (usually the
zinc electrode) gradually wears o ff (dissolves) if the cell is used for a long
time as a current source. Therefore, we can assume that the emergence o f
an emf in a galvanic cell is associated with the process o f metal dissolution.
Indeed, analysis shows that when a metal is dipped into a diluted acid, the
process o f its dissolution begins. However, in this case its positive ions and
impart a negative charge to it (Fig. 118).
I T *
Z n 2*
Emergence of an emf between zinc and sulphuric acid solution.
The process o f dissolution, however, soon ceases since as the ion con­
centration in the solution increases, the reverse process plays more and
more significant role: the ions surrounding the electrode collide with the
electrode in their thermal motion and are deposited on it after neutraliza­
tion by excess electrons remaining in the metal. In a certain time, an
equilibrium sets in: the number o f ions going into solution becomes equal
to the number o f ions liberated from the solution during the same time.
This equilibrium state is characterized by a potential difference between the
metal and the solution, which is typical o f a given metal and solvent.
Naturally, the emerging potential difference does not depend on the size o f
the part o f the metal immersed in the solution since the above-mentioned
equilibrium is established at each region o f the surface in contact with the
solution.
It should be observed that most metals become negatively charged upon
coming in contact with an electrolyte. In a voltaic cell, for example, copper
and zinc go to the solution in the form o f positive ions, and the two elec­
trodes become negatively charged. However, the excess o f negative charge,
and hence the potential difference between copper and acid is smaller than
between zinc and acid. Therefore, in order to use the potential difference
between a metal and a solvent, another electrode made o f a different metal
must be immersed in the solution. Indeed, if we dip two zinc electrodes into
sulphuric acid, the potential o f each o f them will be lower that the potential
o f the solution by the same quantity, and hence the potential difference
between the zinc electrodes will be zero, and the device will not operate as a
galvanic cell. If, however, the second electrode is made o f a different
material, the potential difference between this material and the solution
will be other than that for the first electrode. Consequently, a potential dif­
ference will be observed between two different electrodes, depending on
the nature o f the solvent and the electrodes.
For example, in the case o f a voltaic cell (zinc-sulphuric acid-copper),
the potential difference between the acid and zinc, as well as that between
Chapter 6
the acid and copper, is negative. In other words, if we count all potential
differences from the level o f the acid whose potential is taken for zero, the
potential o f copper will be - 1/, and that o f zinc, —U2, the absolute value
o f —U2 being larger than that o f - f/, by 1 . 1 V. Thus, the potential dif­
ference between copper and zinc will be ( —C/,) - ( - C/j) = U2 — U l =
along the wire from the zinc plate, where their excess is larger, to the cop­
per plate, where their excess is smaller. (The conventional direction o f cur­
rent will be opposite: from C u (+ ) to Z n ( - ).) Now it is clear why the emf
o f a cell is independent o f the area o f the electrodes: it is the difference in
voltages emerging at the interface between the electrolyte and the elec­
trodes, and each o f these voltages is determined only by the nature o f the
electrodes and by the nature o f their interaction with the electrolyte.
Let us now consider, using the Daniell cell as an example, how the
charges move in a closed circuit containing a galvanic cell and how this mo­
tion o f charges, i. e. electric current, is maintained. For clarity, the Daniell
Schematic diagram of motion of charges in a closed
Daniell cell.
cell is depicted in Fig. 119 in a schematic form (two vessels shown in Fig.
partition). The right chamber contains a zinc electrode in a solution o f a
zinc salt (ZnSO*), while the left chamber contains a copper electrode in a
solution o f a copper salt (CUSO4). When the cell is disconnected, a poten­
tial difference is established between each electrode and the surrounding
electrolyte such that equilibrium takes place, i. e. the number o f ions going
into solution per unit time is equal to the number o f ions coming back to
the electrode. Metals are not dissolved or deposited, and the concentrations
o f the solutions remain constant.
Let us now see what happens when we connect the electrodes through a
metal wire as shown in Fig. 119. Since, as was shown above, there exists a
certain potential difference between the zinc and copper electrodes, the
electrons in the outer circuit will move from the electrode with a lower
potential (zinc) to that with a higher potential (copper). Thus, the
equilibrium between the electrode and the electrolyte surrounding it will be
violated in both chambers. In the right chamber, zinc becomes insufficient­
ly negative (since a fraction o f electrons have left it), while copper in the
left chamber becomes too negative (since excess electrons have arrived
here). As a result, zinc will be dissolved in the right chamber and additional
Zn2+ ions will go to the solution and electrons remaining on zinc will
restore its charge. In the left chamber the Cu2+ ions will be neutralized at
the electrode by excess electrons and will be deposited on it in the form o f
copper, the potential difference between these electrodes will be kept all the
time at the same level, and constant current will pass through the circuit for
a long time.
Therefore, in the process described above, excess Zn2+ ions should ac­
cumulate in the right chamber and excess S 0 4“ ions, in the left chamber.
But these oppositely charged particles attract one another, and since the
partition between the chambers is porous, the SO2- ions penetrate through
it from the left to the right chamber, and the concentration o f Z n S 0 4 in the
right chamber increases. In the left chamber, as a result o f the departure o f
Cu2+ ions to copper and o f SO2- ions to the right chamber, the concentra­
tion o f C u S 0 4 in the solution decreases. Clearly, if a cell operated in such
conditions for a long time, the concentration o f Z nS 0 4 in the right
chamber would reach the saturation value, and Z nS 0 4 crystals would
precipitate from the solution. On the other hand, the concentration o f
C uS0 4 in the left chamber would become so low that the em f o f the cell
would drop to zero, and the cell would be unable to operate any longer.
Therefore, in order to ensure a long-term operation o f a cell, a supply o f
C u S 0 4 crystals is maintained in the solution. These crystals are gradually
dissolved, and the solution remains saturated. Crystals o f C u S 0 4 and
Z nS 0 4 just lie at the bottom o f the cell (they are not shown in the figure).
Thus, while electrons in the external circuit o f a galvanic cell (in wires)
move from the electrode with a lower potential to that with a higher poten­
tial (i. e. from zinc to copper electrode), the negative ions (anions S 0 4“ ) in
the electrolyte move from copper to zinc while the positive ions (cations
Cu2+ and Zn2+) move from zinc to copper. Thus, a continuous circulation
o f charges is maintained both outside the cell (in the wires constituting the
external circuit) and inside it (through the electrolyte). The direction o f mo­
tion o f electrons and cations in a Daniell cell is shown in Fig. 119 by small
arrows. In accordance with the conventional direction o f current (Sec. 3.3),
all these charge flows form the total current circulating in the circuit from
copper to zinc.
Chapter 6
Similar processes o f emergence o f an em f occur in other galvanic cells,
although the main process is often complicated by secondary reactions oc­
curring at the electrodes.
The source of energy of electric current is the energy liberated in chemical reactions be­
tween electrodes and electrolytes, associated with the passage of current. In the Daniell cell, as
was shown above, there are two reactions of this kind: the dissolution of zinc and its conver­
sion to ZnS04 on the one hand and the liberation of copper from a CuS04 solution on the
other. The former of these reactions is accompanied by the liberation of energy. If this reac­
tion is carried out in a calorimeter, it is found that the dissolution of a mole of zinc involves
the liberation of 4.4 x 105 J of heat. On the contrary, the reaction of liberation of copper re­
quires an energy supply from outside. The liberation of a mole of copper requires an energy of
sorbed during the liberation of copper is (4.4 — 2.34) x 105 J = 2.06 x 105 J. This is just
the amount of energy which can be produced by a cell upon the dissolution of a mole of zinc
and the liberation of a mole of copper.
Hence we can easily calculate theoretically the emf of a Daniell cell. Suppose that the current
supplied by the cell is so small that the voltage U across its terminals is virtually equal to its emf. It is
well known (Sec. 4.2) that the work A done by a circuit is equal to the charge q that has passed
through the circuit multiplied by the voltage U. But the charge q that must pass through the circuit
for the deposition of a mole of bivalent copper on the electrode is 2 x 96 484 C. Consequently,
the work done by this current is 2 x 96 484 x U [J\ « 1.93 x 105C/j[7). Obviously, this work
must be equal to the energy liberated as a result of chemical reactions occurring in the cell. Thus,
whence
U = 1.07 V.
This value is very close to the true value of 1.09 V.
The electrode (zinc) is obviously dissolved only when a galvanic cell is
used as a current source. In a disconnected element, the electrode should
The reason behind this is that zinc usually contains certain impurities o f
other metals, which come in contact with the solvent and play the role o f
Emergence of spurious currents in a galvanic cell.
the second electrode. Thus, zinc containing impurities dipped into an acid
is itself a short-circuited galvanic cell which hence is continually operating.
Due to these spurious currents (Fig. 120), the dissolution o f the zinc elec­
trode may take place when the entire galvanic cell is disconnected and does
used for the electrodes, as it is done for “normal” galvanic cells, or the zinc
electrode must be constructed so that it can be extracted when the cell does
What amount of zinc will be dissolved under the action of current in a Daniell cell
which supplies a current of 0.5 A for 5 min? The electrochemical equivalent of zinc is
When a voltaic cell is connected to an external circuit containing an am­
meter, the readings o f the ammeter do not remain constant but gradually
become smaller and smaller. Within a few minutes after connection, the
current drops to a fraction o f its initial value. Thus, the voltaic cell
becomes unfit for obtaining a constant current. What is the reason behind
such a decrease in the current?
The answer to this question can be obtained with the help o f the follow­
ing experiment. We dip into acidified water two identical electrodes, made,
for example, o f platinum or carbon (Fig. 121a) and connect them to an
ammeter. N o current will be registered by the ammeter, which is not sur­
prising since we know that no potential difference emerges between two
like electrodes (carbon-carbon) even in an electrolyte solution. Then we
disconnect these electrodes from the ammeter and connect them to a
galvanic cell or some other generator o f current. The electrolysis o f
sulphuric acid will start immediately, and hydrogen will be liberated at one
o f the electrodes, while oxygen obtained as a result o f the secondary reac­
tion between the liberated S 0 4 groups and water, i. e. in the reaction
will be liberated at the other electrode. When we disconnect these elec­
trodes from the source o f current, they will remain covered by the bubbles
o f corresponding gases.
Let us again connect the electrodes with the ammeter (Fig. 121b). Now
a noticeable current appears in the circuit in the direction from “oxygencoated” electrode to the “hydrogen coated” electrode: the latter electrode
plays the role o f the negative pole. The emerging current, however, rapidly
attenuates, and simultaneously gas bubbles disappear from the electrodes.
As soon as the last gas bubbles vanish, the current ceases.
Chapter 6
absent, (b) After a current has been passed through the circuit, a polarization emf emerges
between the electrodes.
The explanation o f this phenomenon consists in that after the elec­
trolysis the electrodes become different: one o f them is covered by the layer
o f oxygen while the other is coated by the layer o f hydrogen. For this
reason, the potentials o f these electrodes relative to the solution also
become different, and a potential difference emerges between them so that
the carbon electrodes become similar to the poles o f a galvanic cell. For this
reason, this phenomenon is referred to as polarization, and the emf emerg­
ing in this case is known as the em f o f polarization.
We can now easily explain why voltaic cells have a poor quality. It was
mentioned earlier (Sec. 6.3) that a current also exists inside a cell, so that
the positive ions and, in particular, hydrogen ions, move from the negative
pole (zinc) to the positive pole (copper). For this reason, hydrogen is
liberated at the positive electrode, and an additional em f o f polarization
appears, which tends to cause a current in the opposite direction. The
emergence o f the em f o f polarization is the main cause o f the attenuation
o f current.
It should be noted that the liberation o f gases at the electrodes is
undesirable for one more reason. Gases liberated at the electrodes do not
conduct electricity. Therefore, the appearing gas bubbles reduce the con­
tact surface between the metal and electrolyte, and hence increase the inter­
It follows from what was said above that the polarization o f galvanic
cells is quite undesirable. Therefore, while constructing galvanic cells,
depolarization is envisaged, viz. the processes which eliminate polarization
to the greatest possible extent.
Will the quality of a voltaic cell be improved if hydrogen is removed from the
positive electrode mechanically, for example, by continually rubbing the copper plate by
a hard brush?
The material which is mainly used for negative electrodes in modern cells is
zinc. The electrolyte is chosen in such a way that the positive zinc ions go­
ing into the solution and combining with the negative ions o f the electrolyte
yield a soluble compound without liberating a gas. For example, if H 2 S 0 4
solution is used as an electrolyte, the dissolution o f zinc gives soluble salt
Z nS 04. Thus, the problem o f depolarization is reduced just to the elimina­
tion o f hydrogen from the positive electrode.
At present, only chemical depolarization is employed. It consists in the
introduction o f a strong oxidizer into the cell, which enters into a chemical
reaction with hydrogen liberated at the positive electrode, and thus
prevents it from being liberated in the gaseous state.
Let us consider some examples of depolarization. Figure 122 shows the construction of
the LeclanchS cell in which the electrodes are made in the form of a carbon rod (C) and a zinc
cylinder (Zn), while the electrolyte is the aqueous solution of ammonium chloride (NH4C1). In
this cell, manganese dioxide (Mn02) is used as depolarizer. For the sake of depolarization, the
carbon rod is placed in a canvas bag filled with crushed manganese dioxide which is mixed
with graphite to improve the conductivity. Hydrogen liberated during the operation of the cell
enters into a reaction with the depolarizer according to the following equation:
M n02 + 2H = MnO + H20
as a result of which hydrogen is oxidized into water by oxygen of the depolarizer, and hence is
plications. This is essentially the Leclanchfc cell in which the liquid electrolyte is replaced by a
starchy mass 1 having the consistency of thick glue and containing ammonium chloride. The
cell is filled from the top by a layer of tar 2 which prevents the mass from falling out when the
cell is overturned and protects it from drying. Carbon electrode 3 has the form of a rod, while
zinc electrode 4 forms the shell of the cell. The cell of a flashlight has a similar construction.
Pocket torches contain two or three small dry cells connected in series.
Chapter 6
Zn Leclanche cell,
Leclanchfc dry cell,
The polarization of the Daniell cell is eliminated very effectively (Sec. 6.2). During the
cell operation, soluble ZnS04 is formed at the cathode (Zn) while metallic copper is deposited
at the anode (Cu). Thus, the surface of metallic electrodes remains pure, and there is no
polarization.
In modern cells, the so-called air depolarizer, in which the atmospheric air is used for ox­
idation of hydrogen, is successfully used. Air is supplied to the anode with the help of a special
device.
Polarization, which is harmful in galvanic cells, has found a useful applica­
tion. It was shown in 1895 by Plants that the emf o f polarisation can be
practically used for obtaining electric current. He constructed a cell with
two lead electrodes immersed in sulphuric acid solution. In such a form,
the cell does not possess any em f since its electrodes are identical. If,
however, a current is passed through this cell for a certain time, the pro­
ducts o f electrolysis are deposited on its electrodes and enter into chemical
reactions with the electrodes. As a result, the electrodes become different in
chemical composition and a certain emf, viz. the em f o f polarization, equal
to about 2 V, appears. In this state, the cell itself is a current source which,
when connected to a circuit, can create a temporary current in it. Thus, to
produce an em f in the Plant6 cell, a current from some other source should
be passed through it for a certain time. This process is known as charging
o f a cell.
The Plante and similar cells based on the polarization phenomenon, are
called secondary cells, or accumulators, since energy can be stored (ac­
cumulated) in them. After the energy o f an accumulator is spent up, it can
be charged again by passing a current, and this process can be repeated
many times.
From the point of view of energy, the situation is as follows. The reactions occurring in
an accumulator during its charging (when its electrodes are made chemically dissimilar) can
proceed only when energy is supplied from outside. This energy is supplied by a generator and
makes ions move in the solution and be deposited on corresponding electrodes. On the con­
trary, reactions involving the liberation of energy occur in the accumulator during its
discharge. It is these reactions that serve as a source of the accumulator emf. Thus, when the
accumulator is charged the electric energy is transformed into latent chemical energy, while
when it is discharged, an inverse transformation of chemical energy into the energy of electric
current takes place.
The construction o f a modern lead-acid accumulator is shown in
in a jar with 15-20% aqueous solution o f sulphuric acid. All the positive
and all the negative plates are connected in two systems so that the small
vessel may contain electrodes having a large area and separated by a thin
layer o f electrolyte, which makes the internal resistance o f the accumulator
very low '.
MIlllllilllllllllMI
m m iniinw iiiiiiiiiiiiiM iii
ifliiHmiiinMiiniiiiiHiinmiiiii
illlUNIIIinillHIIlIH
■IH IIIllllUlIIl
IWIIIHIHHIIliliWIIIIIIHIRIIInm
■ (M llllfH U llii
H IN IIIllllilllllM IIIM
w iiiiim m iiiiiiiiiM
iUMtimMII'HU'BliN"
Lead-acid accumulator
A positive plate of a lead-acid accumulator.
Negative plates are made o f pure metallic lead whose surface has small
pores for increasing the effective area o f the electrodes (sponge lead). The
positive plates have a more complex structure as illustrated in Fig. 125.
They are manufactured by casting (or stamping) a lead frame with a large
lead oxides and binders is pressed.1
is short-circuited (Sec. 4.8), which is extremely harmful for the accumulator.
Chapter 6
In the neutral state, the two electrodes are coated with a layer of lead sulphate (PbS04).
During the charging, the SO* “ ions move to one electrode and convert it into lead dioxide ac­
cording to the reaction
PbS04 + S04 + 2H20 = P b02 + 2H2S04,
while the H + ions reduce the second electrode to metallic lead according to the reaction
PbS04 + 2H = Pb + H2S04.
The compound P b 0 2 becomes the anode while Pb becomes the cathode of the charged ac­
cumulator. In the process of discharging, the current in the external circuit passes from P b02
to Pb, while inside the accumulator the ions S 04“ and H + move in the directions opposite to
those in charging, and the reactions at the electrodes proceed in the reverse direction. In a
completely discharged accumulator, the two electrodes would consist of PbS04. In actual
practice, complete discharging should not be allowed, and an accumulator should be charged
when the voltage across its electrodes drops to about 1.8 V. A freshly charged lead ac­
cumulator has a voltage of about 2.7 V. However, during its discharge the voltage rapidly
drops to 2 V and then is maintained at this level for a long time. After a prolonged discharg­
ing, the voltage of the accumulator starts to drop again, and the discharging should be ter­
minated as soon as the voltage drops to 1.85 V.
Besides lead accumulators, there also exist accumulators of other types. At the present
time, nickel-iron (Ni-Fe) accumulators (or alkali accumulators) are widely used. Their elec­
trodes are made of nickel and iron, while the electrolyte is a 20% solution of an alkali (KOH
or NaOH). In the charged state, nickel plates are coated with a layer of nickel peroxide
cumulators is 1.4-1.1 V. The nickel-iron accumulators are characterized by a high stability:
mechanical shocks and careless maintenance, which may cause undesirable chemical reac­
tions, are much less dangerous for these accumulators than for lead ones.
Different accumulators are characterized by the maximum amount o f
electricity that can be obtained from them without recharging. This
amount o f electricity is usually expressed in ampere-hours (A -h) and is
called the capacity o f the accumulator. For example, portable ac­
cumulators used in motor cars normally have a capacity o f 40 A -h . This
means that they can supply a current o f 1 A in 40 h or o f 2 A in 20 h, and
so on. Naturally, the discharge current must not exceed a certain maximum
value (for a lead accumulator, it amounts to about 1 A per square
decimetre o f the surface o f positive plates) since otherwise the plates are
rapidly destroyed. The larger the area o f the surface o f accumulator plates,
the larger the amount o f electrolysis products that can be retained on the
plates, and hence the larger the charge that can be obtained from an ac­
cumulator in discharging, i.e. the higher its capacity.
An accumulator battery whose capacity is 20 A* h feeds a bulb consuming a current of 0.25 A. How long can the bulb glow without recharging of the accumulator?
Accumulators play an important role in modern electrical engiileering.
For example, accumulator batteries (line accumulators) are often installed,
in addition to dc-generators, in power plants with nonuniform loads.
When the load is small, a part o f the energy produced by the generators is
spent for charging line accumulators, while in the periods when the load is
large, the accumulators feed the system along with the generators. Power
stations operating on the wind energy are always equipped with ac­
cumulators which are charged when the wind is blowing and then supply
the energy to users when necessary, irrespective o f meteorological condi­
tions.
Accumulators are also widely used on all submarines (except those with
are charged from dc-generators, and during submersion all mechanisms are
driven only by the energy stored in the accumulators. Accumulators are
successfully employed in electrically powered trucks (also known as
battery-operated trucks) which work during short time intervals and
therefore internal combustion engines which continuously consume fuel
are inexpedient for them. Accumulator batteries are also used in motor
cars (for ignition and illumination), for mine lamps and in a number o f
other important industrial machines and devices. Accumulators are fre­
quently encountered in laboratory practical work where they serve as
reliable sources o f direct current, and are also employed in radio engineer­
ing. In spite o f great advantages o f accumulators over galvanic cells, the lat­
ter still have a number o f important applications as standards o f voltage
pocket flashlights, microcalculators, and so on.
In Sec. 3.8, we considered Ohm’s law for a conductor, which allowed us to
calculate the current from the known resistance o f the conductor and the
voltage across it. However, problems are often to be solved in which the
voltage across a subcircuit is not specified, but the resistances o f all the
conductors constituting a circuit and the em f applied to it are known. How
can the current be found in this case?
Let us consider a closed electric circuit including a source o f current and
find out with the help o f experiment what determines the current in it. We
connect the current source, say, Daniell cell (see Sec. 6.2), to an external
circuit consisting o f an ammeter and a rheostat and then move the rheostat
slider, thus varying the resistance o f the external circuit. It can be seen that
as the resistance o f the external circuit decreases, the current in the circuit
increases.
Let us now arrange the slider in such a way that the resistance o f the ex­
ternal circuit is insignificant and vary the depth to which the zinc plate is
immersed in the cell. The current will increase with the depth.
Chapter 6
Measurement of current in a circuit with a varying internal
resistance of a cell.
In order to explain this result, we recall that the voltage o f a discon­
and size o f the cell (Sec. 6.3). Consequently, the em f o f the cell does not
change with the depth. Then what is the reason behind the change in cur­
rent? It was shown in Sec. 6.3 that the current flows both in the external
and in the internal circuit. But the cell itself offers a certain resistance to
the current, which is referred to as the internal resistance o f the source. In
galvanic cells, it consists o f the resistance of the electrodes and mainly the
resistance o f the electrolyte column between them. By submerging the zinc
plate to various depths, we change the cross section o f this column, and
hence the internal resistance o f the cell. It can be seen that the current also
depends on the internal resistance o f the current source.
A complete circuit can be regarded as a series connection o f the
resistance o f the external circuit and the internal resistance o f the current
source. The total resistance o f the circuit is the sum o f the internal
resistance o f the source and the resistance o f the external circuit. If we
replace the cell by some other source having the same internal resistance
but a different emf, we shall see that the current will change.
Thus, the current in a circuit depends on the em f o f the current source
and the total resistance o f the circuit.
The quantitative law combining these quantities is Ohm’s law for a
closed circuit: The current in a circuit containing a current source is pro­
portional to the em f o f the source and inversely proportional to the total
resistance o f the circuit.
If we denote the em f o f the source by <?, its internal resistance by r, the
resistance o f the external circuit b y/?, and the current b y /, Ohm’s law can
be written as follows:
+ r Therefore, the current which can be obtained from a given source
depends not only on the emf o f the source and the resistance o f the external
circuit, but also on the internal resistance. All this applies not only to
galvanic cells but also to any current source like an accumulator o f a dcgenerator.
Measurements reveal that the voltage across the terminals o f a current
source connected to an external circuit depends on the magnitude o f the
current supplied by the source (‘load*) and varies with it. Using Ohm’s
law, we can consider this problem in greater detail.
It follows from formula (6.7.1) that
<f = IR + Ir,
where R is the resistance o f the external circuit and r is the internal
resistance o f the source. But we can apply Ohm’s law for a conductor to
the external circuit
IR = U.
Here U is the voltage in the external circuit, i.e. the potential difference
between the source terminals. In accordance with (6.8.1) and (6.8.2), it can
be expressed as follows:
U = <f - Ir.
It can be seen that the voltage U across the terminals o f a source in a
closed circuit is always smaller than £. The voltage U depends on the cur­
rent I and only in the limiting case, when the circuit is disconnected and the
current 1 = 0, the voltage across the terminals is equal to the em f.
A decrease in the voltage across the terminals o f a source in the
presence o f a current can easily be observed in experiments. For this pur­
pose, a galvanic cell must be connected to a rheostat, and a voltmeter must
be connected to the cell terminals (Fig. 127). By moving the slider o f the
rheostat, we can see that the smaller the resistance o f the external circuit,
i.e. the stronger the current, the smaller the voltage across the terminals o f
the source. If we make the resistance o f the external circuit very small in
comparison with the internal resistance o f the source (in case o f the zero
resistance o f the rheostat), i.e. in a short-circuit the voltage across the ter­
minals becomes zero.
As regards the current, it attains its maximum value 7m„ in a shortcircuit. We obtain the value o f the short-circuit current from Ohm’s law
parison with r):
a----
Hence it follows that the short-circuit current depends not only on the emf
but also on the internal resistance o f the source. For this reason, shortcircuiting is hazardous for various current sources.
Chapter 6
As the resistance of the external circuit decreases, the voltage across the terminals of the cur­
rent source drops: (a) circuit diagram of the experiment; (b) general view of the experimental
set-up; 1 — current source, 2 — rheostat, 3 — ammeter, 4 — voltmeter.
Short-circuiting o f a galvanic cell is comparatively harmless since the
internal resistance o f the cell is large, while its em f is small, and hence the
short-circuit currents are small. Such currents cannot cause a serious
damage, and for this reason the requirements to the insulation o f wires in
circuits fed by galvanic cells (bells, telephones, etc.) are not very stringent.
The situation is quite different in lighting systems fed by high-power
generators. These sources have very large emf (100 V and higher) and an
insignificant internal resistance, and the short-circuit current in them can
attain a very large value. In this case, short-circuiting may lead to melting
o f wires, cause a fire, and so on. Therefore, the technical requirements to
the insulation in such circuits are very strict and can by no means be
violated without a risk o f hazardous consequences. Such circuits are always
supplied with fuses (Sec. 4.8), and often at different places: a common fuse
the short-circuit current for this cell.
resistance of 0.6 (2. What is the voltage across the terminals of this cell?
rent emerges during short-circuiting?
troduce a certain error since a certain (although very small) current flows through the
voltmeter, and therefore the source is not disconnected but is rather connected to the
voltmeter. Suppose that the internal resistance of the cell is 1 (2, its emf is 1.8 V, and the
resistance of the voltmeter is 17912. What error is introduced in measuring the emf?
should the electrometer be connected to a cell for measuring its emf?
capacitor is connected in parallel to it as shown in Fig. 128? Will the value of the
capacitance of the capacitor play any role?
To Exercise 6.8.6.
capacitor (Fig. 129a). The electrometer disconnected from the cell indicates 500 V after
the disc has been removed (Fig. 1296)- The capacitance of the capacitor is known to be
reduced to 1/250 of its initial value after the removal of the disc. What is the voltage of
the cell?
To Exercise 6.8.7.
Chapter 6
Current sources are often connected to one another for combined feeding
o f a circuit.
Let us connect galvanic cells so that the positive pole o f each preceding
cell is connected with the negative pole o f the succeeding one (Fig. 130). If
the combination is formed by voltaic cells, the copper electrode o f each cell
has a potential 1.1 V higher than that o f the zinc electrode o f the same cell.
The copper and zinc electrodes o f two neighbouring cells are connected
through a conductor and hence have the same potential. Therefore, the
potential difference between the copper electrode o f the second cell and the
zinc electrode o f the first cell becomes 1.1 + 1.1 = 2.2 V, and so on. If we
have n cells altogether, the voltage between the outer electrodes will be n
times higher than that o f a single cell. The connection o f the cells in which
the positive pole o f each preceding cell is connected to the negative pole o f
each succeeding cell is called the series connection, and the group o f con­
Thus, in a series connection, the em f o f a battery is equal to the sum o f
the em f's o f individual sources constituting the battery. Naturally, this re­
mains true also when individual sources have different emf’s.
Owing to this property, galvanic cells are very convenient as voltage
sources. For example, in order to obtain a voltage o f 1.1 V, it is sufficient
to immerse a zinc plate and a copper plate into a sulphuric acid solution.
To obtain higher voltages, the cells can be connected in series. This cir­
cumstance is used in practice for graduating electrometers: by connecting
various numbers o f series-connected cells to an electrometer, we can direct­
ly determine in volts the voltage corresponding to different divergence o f
its leaves.
The resistances o f series-connected conductors are added (Sec. 3.12).
Therefore, the internal resistance o f a battery o f series-connected sources is
equal to the sum o f the internal resistances o f individual sources.
Two galvanic cells are connected with their like poles: (a) the circuit is disconnected; (b) the
circuit is connected through a bulb.
On the contrary, by connecting like poles o f two similar cells (as shown
in Fig. 131a), we do not obtain any voltage between the outer poles. If,
however, we connect the cells with different em f’s in the same way, the
voltage between the outer poles is equal to the difference in the em f’s o f the
two cells, the positive pole o f such a composite cell being that o f the cell
whose em f is larger. This remains valid if the sizes o f the cells are different
since the voltage o f galvanic cells is completely independent o f their sizes
and is determined only by the materials o f the plates and the electrolyte
used (Sec. 6.3).
We now connect with a wire two outer like poles o f the cells
cells are equal since in this case the resultant emf, i.e. the difference in the
emFs o f the individual cells, is equal to zero. If, however, the em f’s o f
these cells are different, the resultant em f will be nonzero, and there will be
a current in the circuit. The source o f this current will be the cell with the
larger em f, while the cell with the smaller em f will serve as a load (elec­
trolytic bath).
Let us now connect all the positive and all the negative poles o f two or
more cells or other sources o f electric current and connect an external sub­
circuit (load) to the common terminals o f the battery thus formed
o f the same circuit is known as a parallel connection.
If all the parallel-connected cells have equal em Fs, the em f o f the bat­
tery will be the same. If, however, the cells have different em f’s, the em f o f
the battery is equal to the largest em f o f the parallel-connected cells.
However, there is an essential difference between these two cases. If the
em f’s o f all the cells are identical, and the external circuit is disconnected,
Parallel connection of current sources.
there will be no current through the circuit formed only by the cells, and
even in the case o f a disconnected external circuit, stronger cells will supply
current through weaker cells and will wear out. When such a battery is con­
will branch out through the weaker ones. This is uneconomical, and in ac­
tual practice only cells with identical e m fs are connected in parallel.
The internal resistance o f parallel-connected cells can be the same or
different. The total resistance o f a battery, which is calculated by the for­
mula for the total resistance o f parallel-connected resistors, is always lower
than the internal resistance o f each cell separately. In particular, the inter­
to \/n o f the resistance o f an individual cell.
cloth moistened in a solution of sulphuric acid, the cloth is covered by a zinc plate, a cop­
per plate followed by a layer of cloth and a zinc plate, and so on. What is the voltage be­
tween the outer plates of the Volta's stack containing 50 copper plates and 50 zinc plates?
cell is connected to the negative pole of the other cell. What is the voltage between the
outer poles of this battery?
there a current in this circuit? What is the voltage across the terminals of each cell? What
will be the answer to the last question if the cells have the same em fs but different inter­
To Exercise 6.9.4
To Exercise 6.9.5.
like) poles are connected to an external circuit (Fig. 134). Is there a current in this circuit?
What is the voltage across the terminals of each cell?
cuit whose resistance is 0.7 0. Calculate the current in this circuit.
is used for feeding 100 parallel-connected identical incandescent lamps having a
resistance of 60 (2 each. The internal resistance of the generator is 0.05 12, while the
resistance of the leads is 0.1 (2. Calculate the current in the leads.
this cell is connected to a 1 0 resistor, a current of 1 A appears in the circuit. What is the
internal resistance of the cell?
When it is connected to a resistance of 10 0, the current is 0.1 A. Calculate the emf of the
cell and its internal resistance.
However, when the machine is connected to a galvanometer, the latter indicates a current
of only 0.1 mA. What is the internal resistance of the machine? The resistance of the
galvanometer can be neglected since it is considerably lower than the internal resistance
of the machine.
the emf of the battery?
is the internal resistance of the battery?
Determine the internal resistance of the battery.
rent in the circuit?
connected in parallel to a bulb whose resistance is 0.612. What is the current in the cir­
cuit?
current of 0.2 A. Calculate the internal resistance of the battery if the lamp fed by it gives
a normal glow.
internal resistance and capacity?
Lb ■a To Exercise 6.9.19.
+ “ + “ II III —■ ■ a
+ ” resistance and capacity?
complete battery is formed by three parallel-connected batteries I, II and III each of
which contains two series-connected cells. What are the emf and the internal resistance of
this battery if the emf of a cell is 1.1 V and its internal resistance is 1.5 0?
Let us now consider a circuit formed only by conductors o f the first kind.
It was shown in Sec. 6.2 that no electric current emerges in such a circuit,
i.e. the sum o f all emf’s appearing at the boundaries o f different conduc­
tors in contact is equal to zero (Volta’s rule). However, this is true, only if
all the junctions (the regions o f contact between conductors) are at the
same temperature. The situation becomes completely different if one o f the
junctions is heated (Fig. 136). In this case, the galvanometer indicates an
A circuit consisting of an iron and two copper wires and a galvanometer; a and b are junc­
tions.
electric current in the circuit as long as there exists a temperature difference
between junctions a and b. If we shift the burner so that junction b is
heated while junction a remains cold, a current will be observed as before,
but its direction will be reversed. These experiments show that the emf
emerging at the boundary between two metals depends on temperature. It
is larger at the hot junction than at the cold one. Therefore, if the junctions
are at different temperatures, the sum o f all the em f’s emerging in them is
current appears in the circuit.
Thus, in a circuit composed o f different metals while junctions are at
different temperatures, a certain emf called the thermoelectromotive force
German physicist T. Seebeck (1770-1831) and became known as ther­
moelectricity. Any combination o f different conductors o f the first kind,
forming a closed circuit is called a thermocouple.
If we have a more sensitive galvanometer at our disposal, we can detect
a noticeable current at a smaller temperature difference between junctions
a and b. It is sufficient to immerse one o f the junctions into hot water or
just press it firmly between the fingers leaving the other junction at room
temperature to cause a current in the circuit. If the two junctions are placed
in water at the same temperature, their temperatures are equal and no cur­
rent flows in the circuit. If we now leave the junction b in hot water, take
junction a out and cool it, a current will appear in the circuit (in reverse
direction). Thermoelectric current also appears if one o f the junctions is at
room temperature while the other is at a lower temperature, say, in contact
with dry ice. Thus, the reason behind the appearance o f thermo-emf is the
temperature difference o f two junctions. It is important that the
temperature o f parts of the circuit made o f the same material plays prac­
tically no role. If the temperature o f such junctions is the same, the total
thermo-emf in the circuit is zero irrespective o f whether the junctions are at
a very high or very low temperature.
Experiments show that thermo-emf o f thermocouples is generally not
high and is approximately proportional to the temperature difference for
the junctions. Table 6 contains thermo-em f s o f two thermocouples, viz.
Table 6.
T h e r m o -e m f o f th e m o st w id e ly u se d t h e r m o c o u p le s , m V
T em perature o f h o t ju n ctio n ,
°C C o p p e r — c o n sta n ta n
P la tin u m —
p la tin u m -r h o d iu m
copper—constantan and platinum—platinum-rhodium (the alloy con­
sisting o f 90% platinum and 10% rhodium) at the temperature o f the cold
junction o f 0 °C.
O f course, the existence o f thermo-emf and current in a circuit o f the
first-kind conductors with a temperature difference between two junctions
does not contradict the law o f energy conservation. In order to maintain a
temperature difference in the circuit, heat must be supplied to it. The work
in the circuit o f a thermocouple is done at the expense o f this heat.
T h u s a t h e r m o c o u p l e is a h e a t e n g in e t r a n s f o r m in g t h e e n e r g y o f h e a t t o t h e e n e r g y o f
e le c t r ic c u r r e n t. T h e h o t j u n c t io n p la y s t h e s a m e r o le a s a b o ile r o r h e a te r in a s te a m e n g in e ,
w h ile t h e c o ld j u n c t io n s e r v e s a s a c o o le r ( s e e V o l. 1 ). I f w e s u p p ly a n a m o u n t o f h e a t
Tv a t e m p e r a t u r e Tv
Q2 o f
t h e h o t j u n c t i o n w h ic h is a t a t h e r m o d y n a m ic te m p e r a t u r e
f r a c t io n
t r a n s f e r r e d t o t h e c o ld j u n c t i o n w h ic h is a t a
w h ile th e d iffe r e n c e
Q{ t o
t h is h e a t w ill b e
Qx - Q2
w ill b e c o n v e r te d in to th e e n e r g y o f c u r r e n t. T h e e ff ic ie n c y o f a th e r m o c o u p le , i.e . th e fr a c tio n
Chapter 6
o f th e s u p p lie d h e a t tr a n s fo r m e d in to t h e e le c tr ic e n e r g y , is g iv e n b y
Q, - Q2
Q, I t is w e ll k n o w n ( s e e V o l . 1) t h a t t h e m a x im u m e f f i c i e n c y o f a h e a t e n g in e ( in t h e a b s e n c e
o f e n e r g y lo s s e s ) is
G e n e r a l l y , jj <
i ) m ax. T h i s r e m a i n s v a l i d f o r t h e r m o c o u p l e s .
It was shown in the previous section that a thermocouple is a thermal
generator of electric current, i.e. a device in which a fraction of the heat
supplied to the hot junction is converted into electric energy. The remain­
ing portion of heat is given away by the cold junction to the surroundings.
However, due to a high thermal conductivity of metals, the heat transfer­
red by conduction from the hot to cold junction is much larger than the
heat converted into electric energy. Besides, a certain fraction of the elec­
tric energy produced by the thermocouple is converted into heat in the ther­
mocouple itself and cannot be used. Heat expenditures associated with this
are so high that the efficiency of thermocouples made of metals does not
exceed 0.5%, while according to formula (6.10.2), the efficiency of an ideal
heat engine corresponding to a temperature difference of 300 °C must be
about 50%. For this reason, metallic thermocouples are completely un­
suitable as thermal generators of current.
However, thermo-emf may appear in a circuit containing junctions of
metals with some specially manufactured semiconductors. In the presence
of a temperature difference between such junctions, a thermo-emf appears
which exceeds the thermo-emf of a purely metallic thermocouple many
times and may reach 0.1 V for a temperature difference of 100 °C. At the
same time, due to the low thermal conductivity of semiconductors, the
ratio of the amount of heat converted into electric energy and the amount
of heat lost through heat conduction and liberated by the current becomes
much more favourable. The efficiency of semiconductor thermocouples
reaches 15% and can be elevated still further. Semiconductor ther­
mocouples make it possible to develop sufficiently economical industrial
thermal generators in which thermal energy is directly converted into elec­
tric energy.
For the sake of comparison, we can mention that locomotives utilize
the energy of fuel with an efficiency from 4 to 8%, while the efficiency of
low-power steam engines amounts to 10%. On the other hand, in modern
thermal power plants the efficiency reaches 30Vo, and in internal combus­
tion engines operating on high-quality liquid fuel it attains 40-50Vo.
An analysis of the properties of semiconductors revealed that they may
be of two types. In one type, the current in the hot junction flows from
metal to semiconductor, while in the other type, from semiconductor to
metal. Therefore, it is expedient to construct semiconductor thermocouples
in the form represented in Fig. 137. Here the thermo-emf’s produced at the
Schematic diagram of a semiconductor thermocouple: I and 2 — different semiconductor
rods, 3 — connecting metal bridge heated by an external source of heat, R — resistance of the
external circuit in which electric power is consumed. The external circuit is connected to cold
ends of rods I and 2 cooled by air or by running water.
junctions of each semiconductor with a metal are added. Connecting in
series a certain number of such thermocouples, we can obtain a battery
with a sufficiently high thermo-emf.
The most important application of metallic thermocouples is the measure­
ment of temperature. If a junction of a thermocouple is kept at a constant
temperature (for example, room temperature or the temperature of melting
ice for more precise measurements) the thermo-emf of the thermocouple
will be exclusively determined by the temperature of the other junction. If
such a thermocouple is graduated, i.e. the exact dependence of the thermoemf on the temperature difference of the junctions is determined, the
temperature of a body in contact with the second junction can be deter­
mined from the thermo-emf developed in the thermocouple. Figure 138
shows the construction of an industrial thermocouple.
Thermocouples intended for measuring temperature have considerable
advantages over conventional thermometers. Using thermocouples, very
high temperatures (to 2000 °C and even higher) can be measured, which
cannot be done with liquid-filled thermometers. Thermocouples can also
be used for measurement of very low temperatures at which all available
I n d u s t r ia l t h e r m o c o u p le u s e d f o r m e a s u r in g t e m p e r a t u r e o f f u r n a c e g a s e s . T h e j u n c t i o n o f a
p la tin u m
and p la tin u m - r h o d iu m
j u n c tio n ” ). P o r c e la in tu b e
w ir e s
is p la c e d
in to
h ig h -te m p e r a tu r e
zone p r o te c ts th e t h e r m o c o u p le ju n c tio n fr o m th e c h e m ic a l a c tio n o f
h o t g a s e s . F r e e e n d s o f t h e w ir e s a r e c o n n e c t e d t o t e r m in a ls
and t o w h ic h a g a lv a n o m e t e r
g r a d u a t e d in d e g r e e s c e n t i g r a d e i s c o n n e c t e d .
liquids freeze. A very high precision of temperature measurements can be
attained with the help of thermocouples. It is determined by the precision
of measurement of thermo-emf, which considerably exceeds the precision
of measurements with the help of liquid-filled thermometers.
It is significant that thermocouples respond to temperature variation
much faster than other thermometers. In industrial set-ups, the fact that
the temperature can be taken with the help of a thermocouple at a con­
siderable distance from the observer is also very important. A
galvanometer can be installed at a distance of several kilometers from the
thermocouple. This circumstance makes thermocouples very convenient
for instrumentation and automatic systems (self-recording thermometers,
fire-alarms, and so on), as well as for scientific investigations. The applica­
tion of thermocouples for the measurement of very small temperature dif­
ferences is of special importance. Using sensitive instruments one can
measure temperature differences down to 10“ 6 K with the help of a ther­
mocouple.
Owing to their high sensitivity, such instruments can be employed for
measuring the intensity of various types of visible and invisible radiation
trough the thermal effect (heating produced by them). By directing a radia­
tion to a junction of a thermocouple we cause its heating which is propor­
tional to the intensity of radiation.
It was indicated above (see Table 6) that the thermo-emf developed in a
single thermocouple is very small. For this reason, thermocouples are often
combined in batteries for obtaining considerable thermo-emf* s. A
schematic diagram of a thermocouple battery (thermopile) is shown in
ly. All junctions a are kept at the same temperature, while all junctions b
have a different temperature. Individual thermocouples turn out to be con­
is n times larger than that of a single thermocouple.
Such thermocouple batteries are mainly used for measuring the intensi­
ty of visible or invisible radiation through its heating effect. Thermoelectric
radiometers or thermopiles employed for this purpose consist of a small
battery of thermocouples. Half its junctions (say, even junctions) face the
radiation while all odd junctions are on the rear of the instrument and are
heats them, and the temperatures of protected and exposed junctions
become different. This gives rise to a thermoelectric current through a
galvanometer connected to the thermopile. The sensitivity of such in­
struments can be made very high (for example, they can detect the thermal
radiation of a human body. Fig. 140).
T h e r m o e l e c t r i c r a d i o m e t e r . T h e r m a l r a d i a t i o n ( e m i t t e d b y h a n d ) is i n c i d e n t o n t h e r m o p i l e
The e m e r g in g
th e r m o e le c t r ic
cu rren t
cau ses
d e fle c tio n
of th e m ir r o r
of g a lv a n o m e t e r 2 , a n d t h e lig h t s p o t f r o m t h e la m p 5 , r e f le c t e d b y t h e m ir r o r o n s c a le
I. s e n s itiv e
changes
its p o s itio n .
Thus, sensitive thermocouples can serve for detecting moderately
heated bodies at a certain (sometimes rather long) distance from the
observer. These instruments have not only purely scientific application, but
are also employed in the methods of so-called thermal location, i.e. for
detecting towns, plants, ships, etc. at a distance (say, from an aeroplane)
by their thermal radiation.
Chapter 6
One of the junctions of a boiler thermocouple (Pt — Pt-Rh) is placed into the
furnace while the other is at 0 °C. A galvanometer connected to the thermocouple in­
dicates a current of 5.75 x 10“ 5 A. What is the temperature in the furnace if the
resistance of the thermocouple is 10 12 and the resistance of the galvanometer, including
connecting wires, is 90 12? Make use of Table 6.
Electric Current in Metals
The passage of current through metals (first-kind conductors) is not ac­
companied by chemical changes in them (see Sec. 3.2). This circumstance
leads to the conclusion that atoms of a metal do not move from one part of
a current-carrying conductor to another. This assumption was confirmed
by the experiments of the German physicist K. Riecke (1845-1915). He
made up a circuit of three cylinders tightly pressed against one another at
their end faces. Two outer cylinders were made of copper, while the middle
cylinder was made of aluminium. An electric current was passed through
the cylinders for a rather long time (about a year) so that the total amount
of electricity that had passed through them reached a huge value (above
aluminium, carried out by Riecke, did not reveal any traces of one metal in
the other. Thus, electric current in metals does not cause a displacement of
atoms.
Then how is the charge transferred by a current passing through a
metal?
According to electron theory which we used more than once, negative
and positive charges constituting each atom considerably differ. A positive
charge is associated with an atom itself, and under normal conditions is in­
separable from the main part of the atom (its nucleus). Negative charges
are due to electrons which have a definite charge and mass constituting
about 1/2000 of the mass to the lightest atom, viz. hydrogen. Electrons can
easily be detached from an atom. An atom that has lost an electron
becomes a positive ion. In metals, there is always a certain number of
“free” electrons which have been separated from atoms and wander about
the metal, going over from one ion to another. Under the action of an elec­
tric field, these electrons easily move over the metal. On the contrary, ions
form a skeleton of a metal, viz. its crystal lattice (see Vol. 1).
One of the phenomena which convincingly reveals the difference be­
tween positive and negative charges in metals is the photoelectric effect
Chapter 7
mentioned in Sec. 1.9. This effect confirms that electrons can be extracted
from a metal quite easily, while positive ions are strongly bound to the
substance. Since atoms, and hence the positive charges associated with
them, do not move in a current-carrying conductor, the carriers of electrici­
ty in metals are free electrons. A direct confirmation of these ideas was
provided by important experiments carried out in 1912 by L. Mandelshtam
and N. Papaleksi 1 but not reported by them. Four years later (in 1916),
R. Tolman and T. Stewart published the results of their experiments which
were similar to the Mandelshtam-Papaleksi experiments.
The idea behind these experiments was as follows. If there are free
charges in a metal, which have a mass, they must obey the law of inertia
an aggregate of atoms of the metal moving in this direction, which also en­
train free charges. If such a conductor is abruptly stopped, the atoms con­
stituting it will come to a halt, while free charges will continue to move
from left to right by inertia until various obstacles (collisions with the
atoms that have come to a halt) stop them. This phenomenon is similar to
what is observed when brakes are abruptly applied to a tram and
passengers and ‘free* objects (not fixed to the floor) start moving by iner­
tia in the forward direction.
Thus, for a short time after the conductor has been stopped free
charges continue to move in it. But a directional motion of charges is an
electric current. Consequently, if our arguments are correct, a short-term
current should appear in the conductor after it has been abruptly stopped.
The direction of this current allows us to determine the sign of the charges
moving by inertia: if positive charges move from left to right, the current in
the same direction will be observed. If negative charges move in the direc­
tion from left to right, the current will be in the direction from right to left.
The magnitude of the current depends on the sign of the charges and on
their ability to retain their motion by inertia for a long time in spite of
obstacles (i.e. on their mass). Thus, this experiment makes it possible not
only to verify the assumption about the existence of free charges, but also
allows one to determine the charges themselves, their sign and the mass of
their carriers (to be more precise, the charge-to-mass ratio e /m ).
In actual practice, it turned out to be more convenient to use the rota­
tional motion of a conductor instead of translatory motion. The schematic
diagram of this experiment is shown in Fig. 141. A wire spiral 1 is wound
on a coil fixed on the insulated halves of the axle 00. The ends of the spiral
scientists, members of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
Investigation of the origin of electric current in metals.
To Exercise 7.1.1.
are soldered to the halves of the axle and with the help of sliding contacts 2
rapid rotation and then abruptly stopped. The experiment reveals that in­
deed a current flows through the galvanometer.2 The direction of this cur­
rent shows that it is negative charges that move by inertia. By measuring
the charge carried by this short-term current, we can find the ratio of the
free charge to the mass of its carrier. The e/m ratio turns out to be 1.8 x
trons determined by other methods.
Thus, the experiments show that there are free electrons in metals.
These experiments provide the most important confirmation of the elec­
tron theory of metals. The electric current in metals is the ordered motion
o f free electrons (unlike their random thermal motion which always takes
place in a conductor).
A neutral metal disc is set in rapid rotation and hence becomes a “centrifuge for
electrons” . A potential difference appears between the centre O of the disc and its
periphery (Fig. 142,1 — disc, 2 — contacts, 3 — electrometer). What is the sign of this
difference?
different origin, which can be strong enough to mask the expected effect. This is a certain dif­
ficulty in carrying out the experiment.
Calculate the mean velocity of ordered motion of electrons in this wire, assuming that
each silver atom gives one free electron. The density of silver is 10.5 x 103 kg/m3, its
relative atomic mass is 108, and Avogadro’s number N A = 6.02 x 1023 mole-1 .
second to create a current of 2 A in the wire? The electron charge is 1.6 x 10“ 19 C.
Free electrons in a metal, as well as its ions, are in unceasing thermal mo­
tion (see Vol. 1). The energy of this motion is the internal energy of the
body. The motion of ions constituting a crystal lattice, consists in their
vibrations about equilibrium positions. As regards free electrons, they can
move over the entire volume of the crystal.
If there is no electric field in a metal, the electrons move at random: the
velocities of different electrons are different and have different directions
.'*7 *\_J0
VJ tions. (b) In the presence of electric field in a metal, the velocities of all electrons acquire in­
crements in the direction opposite to that of the electric field strength E.
hence they are often referred to as the electron gas. Such a thermal motion
obviously does not cause any current, since due to completely random
tion is equal on the average to the number of electrons moving in the op­
posite direction, and hence the total charge carried through a unit area in­
side a metal is equal to zero.
However, the situation radically changes when a potential difference is
applied to the conductor ends, i.e. an electric field is created in the metal.
Suppose that the electric Held strength inside the conductor is E. Then the
force eE acts on each electron (e is the electron charge). It is directed
against the Held since the electron charge is negative. As a result, the elec­
trons acquire additional velocities in one direction (Fig. 1436). The motion
of the electrons is no longer chaotic: in addition to random thermal mo­
tion, the electron gas moves as a single entity, and hence an electric current
appears. Figuratively speaking, the current in metals can be referred to as
‘electron wind’ caused by the external field.
We can now explain why metals offer resistance to electric current, i.e. why
a potential difference should be maintained all the time between the ends of
a metallic conductor. If electrons did not encounter any obstacles in their
motion, after having been set in ordered motion they would move by iner­
tia for an infinitely long time without an electric field. In actual practice,
however, electrons, collide with ions. Electrons which has a certain velocity
of ordered motion before a collision, will be bounced by ions in arbitrary,
random directions, and the ordered motion of the electrons (electric cur­
rent) will be converted into random (thermal) motion. As a result, the elec­
tric current disappears soon after the electric field has been removed. In
order to obtain durable current, the electrons must be forced to move in a
certain direction again and again after each collision, and for this the elec­
trons must be subjected all the time to the action of a force, i.e. an electric
field must exist in the metal.
The higher the potential difference maintained between the ends of a
metallic conductor, the stronger the electric field inside it, and the stronger
the current in the conductor. Calculations that will not be given here show
that the potential difference and the current are strictly proportional to
each other (Ohm’s law).
Moving under the action of an electric field, electrons acquire a certain
kinetic energy. During collisions this energy is partially imparted to the lat­
tice ions whose thermal motion becomes more vigorous. Thus, in the
presence of current, the energy of the ordered motion of electrons (current)
is continuously transformed into the energy of random motion of ions and
electrons (the internal energy of the body). This means that the internal
energy of the metal increases.
Summing up, we can say that the reason behind the electric resistance is
that electrons in their movement experience collisions with ions o f the
metal. These collisions produce the same result as a certain constant fric­
tion which tends to decelerate the motion of electrons.
The difference in conductivities of different metals is due to different
tron motion, which boils down to the difference in the mean free path, viz.
Chapter 7
the distance covered on the average by an eiectron between two consecutive
collisions with the ions of the metal. This difference, however, is not very
significant, and as follows from Table 2 (see Sec. 3.9), the conductivities
of metals differ just by an order of magnitude. At the same time, even the
poor conductivity of metallic conductors is thousands times higher than the
conductivity of good electrolytes and exceeds the conductivity of semicon­
ductors billions of times.
Superconductivity (see Sec. 3.11) implies that conditions are created in
a metal such that electrons do not experience resistance to their motion.
For this reason, a potential difference is no longer required for maintaining
durable current in a superconductor. It is sufficient to set electrons in mo­
tion, and the current in the superconductor will exist even after the poten­
tial difference has been removed. Such an experiment has already been
described in Sec. 3.11.
It was mentioned in Sec. 7.2 that free electrons in a metal are in an inces­
sant thermal motion. In spite of this, however, they do not fly away from
the metal. This proves that there exist some forces that prevent them from
escaping from the metal. In other words, the electrons in the surface layer,
which tend to go beyond the surface of the metal experience the action of
an electric field which is directed outwards since electrons are negative.
This means that when an electron passes through the surface layer, the
forces acting on it do a negative work —A (here A > 0), and hence there
exists a certain potential difference <p between points in the bulk of the
metal and on its surface, known as escape potential.
It follows from what has been said above that in order to carry out an
electron from a metal to vacuum, a positive work A must be done against
the forces acting in the surface layer. This quantity is known as the work
function, and its magnitude is determined by the nature of the metal.
The work function is connected with the escape potential through the
following obvious relation:
A= ev,l
where e is the electron charge (to be more precise, it is the absolute value of
the electron charge equal to the elementary charge). Therefore, the work
function is usually written as e<p.
An electron can do the work e<p against the forces in the surface layer at
the expense of its kinetic energy. If the kinetic energy is lower than the
work function, the electron cannot pass through the surface layer and re­
mains within the metal. Thus, the condition under which an electron can
escape from the metal has the form
mvn > e<p.
Here m is the electron mass, vn is the normal (perpendicular to the surface)
component of the electron velocity, and e<p is the work function.
At room temperature, the mean kinetic energy of thermal motion of
electrons in a metal amounts to a few tenths of the work function. For this
reason, practically all electrons are kept within the metal by the field of the
surface layer.
The work function is usually measured not in joules but in electronvolts
to the charge o f the electron (i.e. on the elementary charge e) when it passes
through a potential difference o f one vo lt:
leV = 1.60 x 1 0 -|9 C x 1 V = 1.60 x 1Q-19J.
The work function for tungsten (the metal used for manufacturing the filament of
an electron tube) is 4.53 eV. Calculate the minimum velocity at which an electron can
escape from this metal. The mass of an electron is 0.91 x 10” 30 kg, its charge being
The thermal motion of electrons in a metal is of random nature so that the
velocities of individual electrons may differ from one another like the
velocities of gas molecules (see Vol. 1). This means that there is always a
certain number of fast electrons in a metal which are capable to break
through the surface. In other words, if the pattern of the structure of
metals adopted by us is correct, the “evaporation” of electrons must be
observed, which is similar to the evaporation of liquids.
However, at room temperature, condition (7.4.2) is satisfied only for a
is so insignificant that it cannot be observed. The situation changes if the
metal is heated to a high temperature (1500-2000 °C). In this case, thermal
velocities increase, the number of escaping electrons grows, and the
evaporation can be easily detected in experiments. Such an experiment can
be made with a tube T (Fig. 144) containing, in addition to filament C (for
example, made of tungsten), an electrode A . Air is thoroughly pumped out
of the tube in order to exclude the participation of air ions in the process.
The tube is connected to the battery Bx and a galvanometer G so that the
Chapter 7
Observation of the escape of electrons from a metal: (a) general view of the set-up; (b)
schematic diagram of the experiment: T — tube, C — tungsten filament, A — the second elec­
trode, B l — accumulator battery for creating a voltage between the electrodes A and C,
B2 — battery for heating the tungsten filament, G — galvanometer, R — rheostat for controll­
ing filament incandescence.
When the filament is cold, the galvanometer detects no current since
there are neither ions nor electrons between the cathode and anode which
would carry charge. If, however, the filament is heated to the incandescent
state with the help of an auxiliary battery B2 and the filament current
gradually increases, a current appears in the circuit when the filament
becomes white-hot. This current is formed by the electrons evaporating
from the filament, which move from filament C to electrode A under the
action o f the applied electric field. The number o f electrons emitted from a
unit surface o f the incandescent cathode strongly depends on its
temperature and the material from which it is made (i.e. on the work func­
tion). For this reason, the observed current rapidly grows with the filament
temperature.
If a circuit is made in such a way that the positive pole o f the battery
is connected to the filament, there will be no current in the circuit irrespec­
tive o f how strong the filament is heated. This is so because the electric
field now tends to move electrons from A to C and hence returns
evaporating electrons back to the filament. This experiment also shows
that only negative electrons evaporate from metals and not positive ions
which are strongly bound to the crystal lattice o f the metal (cf. Sec. 1.9).
This phenomenon, known as thermionic emission, has a number o f im­
portant applications.
phenomenon.
connected as shown in Fig. 145? Draw the diagram of connection of the tubes in which
the galvanometer would detect a current.
To Exercise 7.5.2.
To Exercise 7.5.4.
tube and reaching the anode under the action of the voltage of 200 V applied between the
cathode and the anode? The parameters for the electron should be taken from Problem
the experiment with a negative charge imparted to the electroscope. Explain why the elec­
troscope leaves collapse in the first experiment and do not collapse in the second one.
Electric Current in Gases
Gases do not conduct electric current in normal state, i.e. they are dielec­
trics. This can easily be confirmed with the help o f a simple experiment
represented in Fig. 147. Even a sensitive galvanometer does not detect cur­
rent if the circuit is discontinued by an air gap. This circumstance is used
every time when a current should be interrupted: .by turning off a knife
switch, we create an air gap between two points o f the circuit. The in­
sulating properties of gases are due to the fact that the atoms and molecules
o f a gas in normal state are neutral (uncharged) particles. Therefore, under
whose motion could create a current.
Hence it is clear that in order to make a gas conducting, free charge car­
riers, viz. charged particles, must either be produced in it by the action of
some external factor or introduced into it from outside, or they are pro­
duced in the gas by the action o f electric field proper, which exists between
the electrodes. In the former case, the conduction in the gas is said to be ex­
trinsic (or induced) while in the latter case the conduction is intrinsic.
The simple experiment that illustrates the emergence o f induced conduc­
tion in gases can be made by using the set-up shown in Fig. 147. The ex­
periment demonstrates that under normal conditions gases do not conduct
current: despite the applied voltage, the galvanometer indicates the absence
o f current in the circuit.
Let us now heat the gas in gap / to a very high temperature by introduc­
ing a burner into it (Fig. 148a). The galvanometer immediately registers
the emergence o f current. Consequently, at a high temperature gas
molecules are no longer neutral. At least a fraction o f molecules
disintegrates into positive and negative parts, i.e. ions appear in the gas.
The process o f ion formation in a gas is known as its ionization. In the ex­
periment described above, ionization is the result of heating.
If we direct an air jet from a small air blower into the gas gap and place
an ionizing flame in the air jet at some distance from the gap (Fig. I486),
Gases in the natural state do not conduct current; 1 — air gap, 2 — accumulator battery, 3 —
galvanometer.
> k /|
when the distance covered by the air ionized by the flame is small; 1 — air gap, 2 — ac­
cumulator battery, 3 — galvanometer.
Chapter 8
the galvanometer indicates a certain current. This means that the ions
formed in the flame do not disappear immediately but are entrained by the
air jet. However, as the distance between the flame and the gas gap in­
creases, the current gradually attenuates and practically vanishes when the
flame is arranged at a few centimetres from the gap. This means that after
the cause o f ionization is eliminated, the number o f ions in a gas rapidly
decreases, and in a certain time the gas again becomes a dielectric.
The disappearance o f ions in a gas is explained by the fact that unlike
ions tend to approach one another under the action o f electric attraction,
and as a result form a neutral molecule. This process is called recombina­
tion, As a result o f recombination, the induced conduction in a gas is not
preserved, and continuous ionization o f the gas is required for obtaining a
durable current in it.
Heating o f a gas to a high temperature is not the only way o f ionizing its
molecules and atoms. Neutral atoms or molecules can be ionized, i.e. can
acquire an electric charge, under the influence o f a number o f other fac­
tors. The most important o f these factors are X-rays.
In the ionization process an electron is detached from a molecule owing
to which the molecule becomes a positive ion. The released electron itself
becomes a carrier o f the negative electric charge. In many cases, however,
the electron ‘sticks* to a neutral molecule which hence becomes a negative
ion. Positive and negative ions are often not single ionized molecules but
groups o f molecules stuck to a negative or a positive ion. For this reason,
the masses o f the ions may considerably differ from the masses o f in­
dividual atoms or molecules although the ion charge is equal to one, two,
or sometimes a larger number o f elementary charges. In this respect, gas
ions differ significantly from ions of electrolytes which, as was shown
above, always represent atoms or certain atomic groups. Because o f this
difference, Faraday’s laws which govern the conduction in electrolytes do
The other, not less important difference between the ion conduction in
gases and ion conduction in electrolytes is that Ohm’s law is not observed
for gases. Measuring the current I flowing through the gas gap and the
voltage U across its boundaries (electrodes), we And that the dependence o f
I o n U (the so-called voltage-current characteristic) is rather complex. For
conductors obeying Ohm’s law (including electrolytes), the voltage-current
characteristic is an inclined straight line indicating the proportionality be­
tween the quantities I and U, while for gases it may have various shapes
depending on the nature o f the discharge.
In particular, for the induced conduction represented in Fig. 148, we
obtain the curve shown in Fig. 149. The / vs. U graph is a straight line only
u n its
Saturation current in the case of induced conduction
of a gas.
U, for small values o f U. As U increases, the graph is curved, and starting
from a certain value o f voltage (normally o f several tens o f volts) it
becomes horizontal. This means that beginning from this voltage, the cur­
rent preserves a constant value in spite o f increasing voltage. This constant
value o f current, which does not depend on voltage, is referred to as the
saturation current.
The meaning o f these results can easily be interpreted. At first, the
discharge increases, i.e. the current / increases, since in a stronger Held the
ions move at a higher velocity. However, irrespective o f the velocity o f
ions, the number o f ions passing through this cross section per unit time
cannot exceed the total number o f ions produced per unit time in the
discharge by an external ionizing agent. If, for example, a burner produces
a million pairs o f ions per second, each ion having a charge o f 1.60 x
maximum current, is equal to 106 x 1.60 x 10“ 19 = 1.60 x 10“ 13 C /s =
If the ionizing agent were stronger, i.e. produced more ions per second, the
value o f the saturation would be larger. However, in this case also, the
maximum current would be determined by the action o f the ionizing agent
and not by the voltage. In other words, saturation would take place. No
saturation is observed only if the ionizing factor is so strong that even at
high voltages the electric field fails to carry away all the ions formed. This
takes place in electrolytes where as a result o f electrolytic dissociation (see
Sec. S.7), the rate o f ion formation is extremely high. For this reason, con­
duction in electrolytes is described by the initial part o f the curve shown in
Experiments show, however, that if we continue to increase the voltage
after the saturation current has been attained in a gas, the shape o f the
voltage-current characteristic shown in Fig. 149 abruptly changes. At a
sufficiently high voltage, the current sharply increases (Fig. ISO).
Chapter 8
Breakdown
Saturation current
Voltage-current characteristic for the transition from an induced discharge to a self-sustained
discharge.
The jump in the current indicates that the number o f ions abruptly in­
creases at once. The reason behind such an increase is the electric field
itself. It imparts so high velocities, i.e. so high energy to some ions that as a
result o f their collision with neutral molecules, the latter dissociate into
ions. The total number o f ions is now determined not by the ionizing agent
but by the action of the field itself. The field can sustain the required
ionization and induced conduction turns into intrinsic conduction. The
phenomenon o f abrupt emergence o f intrinsic conduction described above
and consisting in the breakdown o f the gas gap, is not the only (although
very important) form o f emergence o f intrinsic conduction. We shall now
describe other types o f intrinsic conduction in gases.
Let us connect two spherical electrodes to a battery o f capacitors (Fig. 151)
and start charging the capacitors with the help o f a Wimshurst machine. In
the process o f charging, the potential difference between the electrodes will
increase, and the electric field strength in the gas will increase as well. As
long as the electric field strength is not high, no changes will be observed in
the gas. However, at a sufficiently high field strength (about 3 M V/m ), an
electric spark strikes between the electrodes, which has the form o f a very
bright glowing zigzag channel connecting the two electrodes. Near the
spark, the gas is heated to a high temperature and abruptly expands, which
gives rise to acoustic waves (we hear a crackling sound). In this experiment,
the capacitors are used to make the spark stronger.
The form o f the gas discharge described above is known as a spark
discharge, or spark breakdown o f a gas. When the spark discharge
emerges, the gas abruptly (jumpwise) loses its dielectric properties and
becomes a good conductor. The strength o f the field at which the spark
breakdown o f a gas is observed has different values for different gases and
depends on their state (pressure and temperature).
When the electric field strength in air reaches about 3 MV/m, the electric breakdown of the
gas is observed, and an electric spark strikes.
For a given voltage between the electrodes, the field strength is the
lower, the larger the separation between the electrodes. Therefore, the
larger the distance between the electrodes, the higher voltage must be main­
tained between them for a spark breakdown o f the gas. This voltage is
known as the breakdown voltage.
If we know the dependence of the breakdown voltage on the distance between the elec­
trodes of a definite shape, an unknown voltage can be measured from the maximum length of
the spark. This principle is used in the construction of the spark voltmeter (Fig. 152) which is
convenient for rough estimates of high voltages (for example, in X-ray apparatus). It consists
of two metallic insulated balls one of which can be smoothly moved. The balls are connected
to a source whose voltage is to be measured, and are brought closer to each other until the
spark appears. By measuring the distance between the spheres and the voltage at which the
breakdown occurs, special tables are compiled, which are used to determine the voltage from
the length of the spark. By way of example, we can point out that at a distance of 0.5 cm be­
tween 5-cm balls the breakdown voltage is 17.5 kV, while at a distance of 5 cm, the
breakdown occurs at 100 kV.
The emergence o f a breakdown is explained as follows. There are
always a few ions and electrons in a gas, which have accidentally been
formed. However, their number is normally so small that the gas practical­
ly does not conduct electricity. For comparatively low values o f electric
field strength employed for the investigation o f induced conduction in
gases, collisions between ions moving in the electric Held and neutral
molecules o f the gas resemble elastic collisions between the balls. In each
collision, a moving particle imparts a fraction o f its kinetic energy to a par-
Chapter®
A spark voltmeter.
tide at rest, and the two particles fly apart after the collision, no internal
changes occurring in them. If, however, the electric field strength is larger,
the kinetic energy stored by an ion between two successive collisions may
attain a value sufficient for ionizing a neutral molecule in a collision. As a
result, a new negative electron and a positive ion are formed. This process
is known as collision ionization, and the work that must be done to detach
an electron from an atom is called the ionization potential. The work o f
ionization potential depends on the atomic structure and hence is different
for different atoms.
A free electron 1 colliding with a neutral molecule splits it into electron 2 and a free positive
ion. In their subsequent collisions with neutral molecules, electrons 1 and 2 again split their
molecules into electrons 3 and 4 and free positive ions, and so on.
Electrons and ions formed as a result o f collision ionization increase the
field and may cause the collision ionization o f new atoms. Thus, this pro­
cess 'amplifies itself*, and the ionization in the gas very soon becomes
significant. This phenomenon is quite similar to snow avalanche in the
mountains, which may be caused by a small snowball. For this reason, the
process described above was called the ionic avalanche (Fig. 153 and 154).
The ionic avalanche is just a spark breakdown, while the minimum voltage
at which the ionic avalanche appears is the breakdown voltage. Thus, the
Avalanche multiplication of positive ions and electrons as a result of collisions of positive ions
with neutral molecules.
reason behind gas ionization in a spark breakdown is the splitting o f atom s
and molecules in collisions with ions (collision, or impact ionization). 2
smaller the number of atoms contained in a unit volume of the gas, and the longer the
distance covered by its atoms between successive collisions. Taking this into account, say
how the breakdown voltage in a gas gap will change (increase or decrease) as a result of a
decrease in the pressure.
A beautiful but dangerous natural phenomenon — lightning — is a spark discharge in the at­
mosphere.
The similarity between lightning and electric spark was noticed as early as in the 18th cen­
tury. It was supposed that storm clouds carry large electric charges, and a lightning is a giant
spark differing from a spark between the electrodes of a Wimshurst machine only in size. This
was pointed out, for example, by the great Russian physicist and chemist M.V. Lomonosov
This was confirmed in experiments carried out by Lomonosov in 1752-3 and in­
dependently by the American researcher B. Franklin (1706-1790).
Lomonosov constructed a “thunder machine” — a capacitor mounted in his laboratory
and charged by the atmospheric electricity through a wire whose end was brought out of the
room and elevated on a high pole. During thunderstorms, sparks could be extracted from the
capacitor by touching it.
Franklin flied a kite supplied with an iron rod during a thunderstorm. The lower end of
the rope attached to the kite was fixed to a door key. When the rope got wet and became a
conductor of electricity, Franklin could extract sparks from the key, charge Leyden jars and
carry out other experiments normally made with a Wimshurst machine. 3
streamers and is in fact more complicated than the process described above. However, the
details of the breakdown in gases are beyond the scope of this book. — Eds.
the kite, and large charges will then pass to the Earth through the experimenter’s body. Such
sad cases are known from the history of physics. For example, in 1753 G. Richman who
worked with Lomonosov was killed by lightning in St. Petersburg.
Thus, it was shown that siorm clouds are indeed electrically charged.
Different parts of a cloud carry charges of different signs. Most often the lower part of
the cloud (facing the Earth) bears a negative charge, while the upper part is charged positively.
Therefore, if two cloulds approach each other so that their unlikely charged parts face each
other, a lightning may appear between them. But a lightning discharge may also occur in a
different way. Flying above the Earth, a storm cloud induces large charges on the surface of
the Earth, and the cloud and the Earth’s surface form the plates of a large capacitor. The
potential difference between the cloud and the Earth attains huge values of hundreds of
millions volts, and a strong electric field emerges in air. If the strength of this field becomes
high enough, a breakdown may occur, i.e. the lightning will strike the Earth. Sometimes
lightnings strike people or cause fires.
According to long-term observations, the spark discharge in a lightning is characterized
by the following parameters
Voltage between a cloud and the Earth
Current in lightning
Duration of lightning
Diameter of glowing channel
The thunder heard after a lightning is of the same origin as the crackling during a spark
created in a laboratory. Namely, the air within the lightning channel is strongly heated and ex­
pands producing acoustic waves. As a result of reflection from clouds, mountains, etc., echo
peals of thunder can often be heard.
An ionic avalanche does not always result in a spark. Sometimes it causes
another type o f discharge, viz. the corona discharge.
Let us stretch a metallic wire ab having a diameter o f a few tenths o f a
millimetre between two insulating holders and connect it to the negative
pole o f a generator (say, a powerful Wimshurst machine) producing a
voltage o f several thousand volts (Fig. 155). The other pole o f the
Obtaining of a corona discharge.
generator is earthed. We obtain a sort o f a capacitor whose plates are the
wire and the walls o f the room (which are naturally in contact with the
Earth).
The field o f such a capacitor is rather nonuniform, its strength being
very high near the thin wire (Sec. 2.19). Gradually increasing the voltage
across the wire in the dark room, we can notice that at a certain voltage a
weak glow (‘corona’) appears in the vicinity o f the wire, which embraces it
from all sides. The glow is accompanied by a hushing sound and slight
crackling. If we connect a sensitive galvanometer between the wire and the
voltage source, it will indicate a noticeable current appearing during the
glow and having the direction from the generator to the wire through the
leads and from the wire through the air to the walls o f the room connected
to the other pole o f the generator. The current in air between the wire and
the walls is created by the ions formed in the air as a result o f collision
ionization. Thus, the glow o f the air and the emergence o f current indicate
a strong ionization o f air under the action o f electric field.
A corona discharge may appear not only in the'vicinity o f the wire but
also near tips o f pointed objects and in general near any electrode produc­
ing a strongly nonuniform field (see Sec. 2.19).
on the body has attained a certain value, which is determined by the shape and size of the
body as well as the properties of the surrounding medium, it cannot be increased further.
Explain this.
minate by metallic balls?
metallic brush with points. Charged regions of the disc passing by the brush impart to it
their charge although the points do not touch the disc. Why is this possible?
mediately becomes transparent when sharp metal electrodes connected to a Wimshurst
machine are introduced into it. Figure 156 shows a modification of this illustrative experi­
ment. A glass tube contains two electrodes, viz. a metal cylinder and a thin metal wire
stretched along the cylinder axis by a heavy ball. The electrodes are connected to a Wimshurst
machine. If a stream of smoke (or dust) is blown through the tube, and the electric machine is
rotated the outflowing stream becomes perfectly clean and transparent as soon as the voltage
becomes high enough for the appearance of corona. All solid particles contained in the gas
precipitate on the electrodes.
This experiment can be explained as follows. As soon as a corona appears around the
wire, air in the tube is strongly ionized. Gas ions colliding with the dust particles “stick” to the
latter and impart an electric charge to them. Since there is a strong electric field in the tube,
charged particles move under its action to the electrodes and precipitate on them. This
phenomenon is employed in industry for cleaning of industrial gases from solid and liquid
particles in large volumes.
ple of highly important physical instruments, viz. the so-called counters of elementary par­
ticles (electrons and other particles formed as a result of radioactive transformations). One
ENGINES
Y CIRCLE
A simple electrostatic filter.
Schematic diagram of a Geiger-Mtlller counter of
elementary particles.
type of counter (the Geiger-Mtlller counter) is shown in Fig. 157. It consists of a small metallic
cylinder with a window covered with a tin foil, and a thin metal wire stretched along the
cylinder axis and insulated from it. The counter is connected to a circuit containing a current
source producing a voltage of a few thousand volts. The voltage is chosen in such a way that it
is only slightly lower than the "critical” voltage, i.e. the one required for the initiation of a
corona discharge in the counter. When a fast electron gets into the counter, it ionizes gas
molecules in the counter, and as a result the voltage required for initiating a corona becomes
slightly low^r. A discharge appearing in the counter is registered from a weak short-term cur­
rent in the circuit.
The current appearing in the circuit is so weak that it can hardly be detected by an or­
dinary galvanometer. However, it can be made quite noticeable if a very large resistance R is
introduced in the circuit and a sensitive electrometer is connected in parallel to it (Fig. 157).
When a current / appears in the circuit, a voltage U , which according to Ohm’s law is equal to
IR, is created across the resistor. If resistance R is very large (several million ohms), but much
smaller than the resistance of the electrometer itself, even a weak current will cause a
electrometer will diverge.
Similar counters make it possible to detect not only fast electrons but any rapidly moving
charged particles capable to ionize the gas by collisions. Modem counters easily detect a single
particle and give a convincing proof that elementary charged particles actually exist in nature.
About 1800 thunder storms are known to occur in the Earth’s atmosphere simultaneously and
produce about 100 flashes of lightning per second. Though the probability that any individual
person will be struck with a lightning is negligibly low, lightning nevertheless does much harm.
It is sufficient to say that about half breakdowns in large-scale modem transmission lines is
caused by lightning. Therefore, the protection from lightning is an important problem.
Lomonosov and Franklin (see Sec. 8.4) not only explained the electric origin of lightning
but also worked out the construction of a lightning conductor to protect buddings from
lightning strokes. A lightning conductor is a long wire with the pointed upper end which is fix­
ed above the uppermost point of a building being protected (Fig. 158). The lower end of the
A lightning conductor.
wire is tnoroughly earthed. For this purpose, it is usually soldered to a metal sheet which is
dug into the ground on the level of underground water. During a thunderstorm, large charges
are induced on the Earth’s surface, and a strong electric field is created at the ground. The
field strength is especially high near pointed objects, and for this reason a corona discharge
appears near the upper end of the lightning conductor. As a result, induced charges cannot be
accumulated on the building and no lightning occurs. If, however, a lightning still appears
without causing any damage.
In some cases, a corona discharge from a lightning conductor is so strong that a glow can
be clearly seen at the point. Such a glow sometimes appears also near other pointed objects,
say, at the tops of ship masts, sharp crowns of trees, etc. This phenomenon was noticed cen­
turies ago (St. Elmo fire) and caused superstitious horror of sailors who could not understand
its actual origin.
It should be noted that a lightning conductor executes its duty only if it is thoroughly
earthed since otherwise induced charges cannot pass from the surface of the Earth and
buildings to the air.
In 1802, the Russian physicist V .P . Petrov (1761-1834) discovered that if
two pieces o f charcoal are connected to the poles o f a large battery,
brought in contact and then slightly moved apart, a bright flame is ignited
between the pieces o f coal, their ends being white-hot and emitting dazzling
light (electric arc). Seven years later, this phenomenon was observed by the
English physicist H. Davy who proposed to call this arc voltaic after A.
Volta.
A set-up for obtaining an electric arc; I and 2 — carbon electrodes.
pieces o f carbon are fixed in a controlling holder (it is better to take not or­
dinary charcoal but specially made rods o f arc carbon obtained by pressing
a mixture o f graphite, carbon black and binders). The source o f current
can be lighting system. In order to avoid short-circuiting at the moment o f
contact between the pieces o f carbon, a rheostat must be connected in
series with the arc.
The lighting system is normally fed with alternating current. However,
the glow o f the arc is more stable if the current o f constant direction is
passed through it, so that one o f its electrodes is always positive (anode)
and the other is negative (cathode). Figure 160 presents a photograph o f
white-hot electrodes o f such an arc. There is a column o f incandescent gas
this column emits much less light than white-hot pieces o f carbon and it
cannot be seen on the photograph. Since the positive electrode has a higher
temperature than the negative one, it burns out sooner. As a result o f in­
tense sublimation o f carbon, a depression is formed in it, known as a
positive crater, which is the hottest part o f the electrodes. The temperature
o f the crater in air under the atmospheric pressure reaches 4000 °C.
*} pieces closer at a uniform velocity as they are burnt out. The thickness of the positive car­
bon electrode is always made larger than that of the negative electrode. Why?
An arc can also be struck between metal electrodes (made o f iron, cop­
per, etc.). In this case, electrodes melt and evaporate at a high rate, which
requires a large amount o f heat. For this reason, the temperature o f the
crater o f a metal electrode is normally lower than that o f a carbon electrode
Chapters
An arc struck between carbon electrodes in a compressed gas (at about
crater to 5900 °C, i.e. to the temperature on the surface o f the Sun. Car­
bon was found to melt in this case. A still higher temperature can be ob­
tained in a column o f gas and vapour through which an electric discharge is
passed. An intense bombardment o f this gas and vapour by electrons and
ions accelerated by the electric Held o f the arc brings the temperature o f the
gas column to 6000-7000 °C. For this reason, almost all known materials
melt and evaporate in the column o f the arc, and many chemical reactions
which cannot be carried out at lower temperatures become possible.
Refractory porcelain rods, for example, can easily be fused in the flame o f
the arc.
In order to maintain an arc discharge, a high voltage is not required.
The arc glows well at a voltage o f 40-45 V between its electrodes. On the
other hand, the current in the arc is significant. Eor instance, even in a
small arc in the experiment shown in Fig. 159, the current attains 5 A,
while in large arcs used on industrial scale the current reaches hundreds o f
amperes. This means that the resistance o f the arc is low, and hence the
glowing gas column is a good conductor o f electricity.
*) 8.8.2. An arc lamp consumes the current of 300 A at a voltage of 60 V across the elec* trades. What amount of heat is liberated in this arc in 1 min? What is the resistance of
the arc?
Such a strong ionization o f a gas is possible only due to the fact that the
cathode o f the arc emits a very large number o f electrons which ionize the
gas in the gas-discharge gap by impacts. The intense electron emission from
the cathode is possible since the arc cathode itself is heated to a very high
temperature (from 2200 to 3500 °C depending on the material). When the
electrodes o f the arc are initially brought in contact, almost the entire Joule
heat o f the current passing through the electrodes is liberated in the contact
region which has a very high resistance (see Sec. 4.4). For this reason, the
ends o f the electrodes are strongly heated, which is sufficient for striking
an arc when they are moved apart. Then the cathode o f the arc is
maintained in the incandescent state by the current passing through the arc.
In this process, the main part is played by the bombardment o f the cathode
by positive ions impinging on it.
The current-voltage characteristic o f the arc, i.e. the dependence o f the
current / in the arc on the voltage (/between its electrodes, is very peculiar.
Formerly, we encountered two forms o f this dependence, i.e. in metals and
electrolytes the current increases in proportion to voltage (Ohm’s law),
while for induced conduction o f gases the current first increases with
voltage, then attains saturation and becomes independent o f the voltage.
As the current in the arc discharge increases, the voltage at the terminals
decreases. The arc is said to have a sloping-down current-voltage
characteristic.
Thus, an increase in current in the arc discharge leads to a decrease in
the resistance o f the gap between the electrodes and in the voltage between
them. In order to make the glow o f the arc stable, a rheostat or some other
ballast resistance must be connected in series with it (Fig. 1S9).
Because o f the high temperature, the electrodes o f an arc emit dazzling
light.4 For this reason, the electric arc is one o f the best sources o f light. It
consumes only 0.3 W per candela and hence is much more economical than
the best incandescent lamps. Electric arc was used for the first time for
lighting in 1873 by the Russian engineer and inventor P .N . Yablochkov
Although arc lamps are now replaced by incandescent lamps almost
completely (see Sec. 4.7), they are still effectively used wherever very
powerful and bright sources o f light are required (for projectors, in
cinematography, etc.).
Electric arc is also employed for welding metallic parts (arc welding).
The possibility o f this application o f the arc was also indicated by
V. V. Petrov and was developed for the first time by the Russian inventors
N .N . Benardos (1885) and N .G . Slavyanov (1890). The parts to be welded
serve as positive electrode. The electric arc is struck after bringing them in
contact with the carbon electrode connected to the negative pole o f a cur­
rent source, and the metal is melted. The face o f a welder, and especially
his eyes must be covered with a thick glass since otherwise invisible
ultraviolet radiation abundantly emitted by the arc may cause serious eye
and skin diseases. Glass, however, does not transmit ultraviolet radiation.
At the present time, electric arc is also widely used in industrial electric
furnaces. In the world industry, 90% o f all tool steel and almost all special
steels are melted in electric furnaces. Many o f these furnaces employ elec­
tric arcs (Fig. 161).
The quartz lamp, which consists o f a mercury arc in a quartz tube,
presents much interest. In this lamp, the arc discharge occurs not in air but
in the atmosphere o f mercury vapour. For this purpose, a small amount o f
mercury is introduced into the lamp, and air is pumped out. The light o f
the mercury lamp is very rich in invisible ultraviolet rays which have strong
Chapter 8
chemical and biological effects. In order to use this radiation, the lamp is
made not o f glass, which strongly absorbs ultraviolet radiation, but o f
fused quartz. Mercury lamps are used for curing various diseases (“ar­
tificial sunlight”) and for scientific researches as a powerful source o f
ultraviolet radiation. The light o f the mercury lamp is also very harmful for
eyes.
Arc melting furnace: I — electrodes, 2 — molten metal,
Besides spark, corona and arc, there is one more type o f self-sustained
discharge in gases, viz. the glow discharge. For obtaining this type o f
discharge, it is convenient to use a 0.5 m long glass tube containing two
metal electrodes (Fig. 162). The electrodes are connected to a d.c. source
producing a voltage o f several thousand volts (a Wimshurst machine fits
for this purpose), and air is gradually pumped out o f the tube. Under the
atmospheric pressure, the gas in the tube remains dark since the applied
voltage o f a few thousand volts is insufficient for the breakdown o f the
long gas gap. However, when the gas pressure becomes sufficiently low, a
glowing discharge appears in the tube. It has the form o f a thin pinch
electrodes. In this state, the gas column is a good conductor o f electricity.
When the air is pumped out further, the glowing pinch is blurred and
widened, and almost the entire tube is filled with the glow. At a gas
pressure o f several tenths o f mm Hg, the discharge has a typical form
shown schematically in Fig. 162. Two main parts o f the discharge are
distinguished s : (a) dark part adjoining the cathode and known as dark
cathode space, and (b) glowing gas column filling the remaining part o f the
tube up to the anode and referred to as the positive column. At a certain
pressure, the positive column may split into separate layers alternating with
dark gaps (so-called strata). 5
portance.
Glow discharge.
This form of discharge is called the glow discharge. Almost all light
emitted during the discharge comes from the positive column. The colour
of the glow is determined by the nature of the gas.
Tubes with glow discharge are used in practice as sources of light and
are called gas-discharge tubes. The tubes employed for lighting purposes
are often filled with mercury vapour. In these tubes, the ultraviolet radia­
tion which is harmful for eyes is absorbed by a layer of a phosphorescent
material coating the inner walls of the tube. This material emits visible light
which is added to the intrinsic glow of mercury vapour, producing light
which is close in composition to the day light (daylight lamps). Such lamps
siderably more (three-four times) economical than incandescent lamps.
Gas-discharge tubes are also used for decorative purposes. Then they
are given the shape of letters, various figures, etc. and filled with a gas pro­
ducing beautiful illumination (e.g., neon gives a bright orange glow, while
argon glows with a bluish-green light).
In a glow discharge, the gas is a good conductor of electricity. This means that intense ioniza­
tion is maintained in the gas all the time. But in contrast to the arc discharge, the cathode in
the glow discharge remains cold. Then why is a large number of ions formed in this case?
The potential (or voltage) drop per unit length (i.e. AU/Al) of the gas column in a glow
discharge is different in different parts of the discharge. If we seal in platinum wires along a
gas-discharge tube, we can measure the voltage U between various points of the discharge, in
particular, between any point of the column and the cathode by connecting an electrometer to
various wires (Fig. 163). Plotting this voltage along the ordinate axis and the distance / from a
given point to the cathode along the abscissa axis, we obtain the curve shown in the upper part
of Fig. 163. It can be seen that almost the entire potential drop occurs in the dark space. The
potential difference between the cathode and the boundary of the dark cathode space is
known as the cathode drop. It amounts to hundreds, and sometimes thousands of volts. Ex­
periments show that the cathode drop is the most important feature of a glow discharge,
without which it cannot exist.
The role of the cathode drop consists in that the positive ions passing through this large
potential difference acquire a high velocity. Since the cathode drop is concentrated in a thin
gas layer, the ions practically do not collide with the gas atoms. For this reason, the ions mov­
ing in the region of the voltage drop acquire a very high kinetic energy. As a result, they knock
out of the cathode a certain number of electrons which start to move towards the anode.
Crossing the dark cathode space, the electrons are in turn accelerated by the cathode drop.
Colliding with the gas atoms in more remote parts of the discharge (in the positive column),
Chapter 8
Potential distribution in a glow discharge: U — potential difference between a given point in a
discharge and the cathode, / — the distance from the cathode along the tube.
they cause impact ionization. The positive ions thus produced are again accelerated by the
cathode drop and knock new electrons out of the cathode, and so on. Thus, new and new ions
are formed, and the discharge lasts as long as the required voltage is maintained between the
electrodes. Therefore, the mechanism o f gas ionization in a glow discharge is the collision
ionization combined with electrons being knocked out o f the cathode by positive ions.
It follows from what has been said above that the stronger the electron bond in the metal
of the cathode, the higher the energy that must be acquired by positive ions for knocking out
electrons, and hence the larger the cathbde drop that must be created in the discharge. Conse­
quently, the cathode drop depends on the cathode material. Experiments show that it also
depends on the type of gas. By selecting appropriately the cathode material and the gas in a
gas-discharge tube, the cathode drop can be made very small. Figure 164 shows schematically
a neon glow-discharge lamp. Electrodes 1 and 2 are iron plates coated by a barium layer from
which electrons can be easily knocked out. Here, the cathode drop amounts to only 68 V, and
the lamp glows even when connected to a city lighting system. If we deal with alternating cur­
rent, plates 1 and 2 play the role of the cathode alternately.
As the amount of gas in a gas-discharge tube decreases, the dark cathode
space becomes larger and the positive column becomes shorter and less
bright. With a further decrease in pressure the glow becomes still weaker,
and the glass of the tube in the vicinity of the cathode starts to glow slight­
ly. When the pressure drops to 0.001 mm Hg, the gas glow practically
ceases, while almost the entire surface of the glass tube emits a bright
glass becomes weaker. Starting from a pressure of 10“ 4-10” 5 mm Hg it
disappears altogether, and the discharge terminates. How can the green
glow of glass be explained?
If the anode of a gas-discharge tube is given the form of a certain figure
the cathode were a small source of light. Consequently, the glow of glass is
caused by a sort of rays emitted by the cathode. They do not pass through
the metal plate of the anode, and its shadow image is formed. These rays
became known as cathode rays.
Cathode rays cause the glow of not only glass but also of other
materials. Different substances emit light of different colour. Chalk, for
example, glows red, zinc sulphide produces light-green colour, and so on.
This glow can be observed, for example, by placing pieces of various
minerals between the cathode and the anode of a gas-discharge tube
can easily be revealed from the glow of bodies bombarded by them.
Coating the surface of objects by substances which glow under the action
of cathode rays, we obtain luminescent screens (from the Latin lumen
meaning ‘light”) which are convenient for the observation of cathode rays.
By arranging such a screen along the tube at a small angle to its axis, we can
easily trace the direction of cathode rays in the tube. For convenience of
observation, a shutter with a long slit is placed in front of the screen. It cuts
out a portion of the cathode beam, which leaves a narrow bright trace on
the luminescent screen (Fig. 167).
Chapter 8
A device for the observation of glow under the effect of cathode
rays.
The rectilinear trace of a beam of cathode rays cut out by a slit on the luminescent screen.
The nature of cathode rays is revealed while experimentally studying their
properties. Below we present the main results of these experiments.
statement is provided by the experiment shown in Fig. 168. A hollow elec­
trode (Faraday’s cylinder, see Sec. 2.20) connected to a sensitive elec­
troscope is placed in the path of the cathode rays. Getting into the cylinder,
cathode rays transfer the whole of their charge to the electroscope. The
analysis of the sign of the charge (see Sec. 1.7) reveals that cathode rays
bear a negative charge.
the surface o f the cathode (Fig. 169). Therefore, if the cathode has the
r< ± ?
Cathode rays carry a negative charge.
Cathode rays propagate along straight lines normal to the surface of the cathode. Their direc­
tion does not depend on the position of the anode: (a) a flat cathode produces a beam of
parallel rays, (b) a concave spherical cathode “focusses” cathode rays.
shape of a part of a sphere, the cathode rays, propagating along the radii of
this sphere, are gathered (“focussed") at its centre (Fig. 1696). If we place a
luminescent screen in this region, a bright spot will be seen on it. The posi­
tion of this spot is completely independent of the shape and position of the
anode in the tube.
This property of cathode rays is explained by the nature of the electric field in a gasdischarge tube. The presence of the cathode drop (Sec. 8.11) indicates that the electric field is
very strong in the vicinity of the cathode and is much weaker in the remaining part of the tube.
For this reason, cathode rays, which are charged particles, experience the action of very strong
forces near the cathode, which are directed along the field lines. But the field lines at the
cathode are normal to its surface (as to the surface of any conductor, see Sec. 2.7) irrespective
of the shape of the anode and its position. Therefore, near the cathode, the cathode rays start
to move in the direction normal to the cathode surface and acquire almost the entire huge
velocity in the immediate vicinity of the cathode. Further motion occurs practically along a
straight line (by inertia) since the forces acting on cathode rays away of the cathode are in­
significant. Far from the cathode, the electric field is weak.
The observations described above show that cathode rays propagate according to the
laws of mechanics, and hence have a certain mass.
Chapter 8
ing illustrative experiment. A light propeller is fixed on an axle in the path
of cathode rays so that they fall on its blades (Fig. 170). The propeller is set
in rotation, indicating that cathode particles impart to it their momentum
mv (m is the mass and v is the velocity of a particle).
heating o f these bodies. If a thin tin foil is placed in a gas-discharge tube at
the middle of a spherical cathode (Fig. 171), it is strongly heated and may
even melt.
A light propeller rotates as the momentum of the
cathode rays is imparted to the blade on which
they fall.
Heating by cathode rays. Platinum
foil becomes red-hot and glows
under the action of cathode rays.
Similar experiments show that cathode rays have a kinetic energy which
they transfer to the bodies being bombarded. This is what should be ex­
pected since the cathode particles have a mass m and fly at high velocity v.
Consequently, each cathode particle must have the kinetic energy mv2/ 2,
which is imparted by it to a body it strikes. At the expense of this energy,
cathode rays cause the glow of a luminescent screen. They also darken a
photographic plate and may cause certain chemical reactions.
gas-discharge tube. Calculate the maximum velocity of electrons in the cathode beam.
The electron charge and mass are 1.60 x 10“ 19 C and 0.91 x 10"30 kg respectively.
rent through the tube is 10 mA. What amount of heat is liberated from the anode per
second?
field on cathode rays can easily be predicted since we know that cathode
rays bear an electric charge. The experiments confirming this statement can
be successfully carried out with a device shown in Fig. 172. The anode is
made in the form of plate 1 with a small hole in it and placed against
cathode 2. A luminescent screen is arranged at the other end of the tube. A
high voltage is applied between 1 and 2. The hole in the anode isolates from
the cathode rays a narrow beam whose trace produces a bright spot 5 on
the screen. The cathode beam passes between plates 3 and 4. If an electric
field is created between 3 and 4 in the direction from 3 to 4, the cathode
beam is deflected by this field, and the bright spot will be shifted to point 6.
The direction of the displacement indicates that cathode particles are
deflected against the field, which confirms that they bear a negative charge.
Deflection of cathode rays in an electric field.
Cathode rays are deflected by a magnet. In order to investigate this
phenomenon, use can be made of the tube shown in Fig. 172. By bringing a
magnet close to a narrow beam of cathode rays, we can observe a displace­
ment of their trace on the screen (Fig. 173). If in this experiment the north
pole of the magnet is above (or below) the beam, the cathode rays are
deflected to the left (right). If the north pole of the magnet is at the right
direction. If the south pole of the magnet is brought close to the beam, the
direction of deflection of the beam is reversed. These experiments are
perfectly explained by the fact that cathode rays are formed by a flow of
electric current, and it is well known (see Sec. 3.2) that a current and a
magnet act on each other. This question will be considered in greater detail
in Chap. 10.
The deflection of cathode rays by a magnet can be demonstrated with
the help of a device shown in Fig. 167. When the magnet is brought close to
the tube, the trace of the cathode beam on the screen is noticeably bent
The trace of a cathode beam (light spots) is displaced under the action of a magnetic field
Deflection of cathode rays in a magnetic field. A cathode beam that has passed through a slit
is deflected by a magnet brought close to the tube. The bent trace of the beam can be seen on
the screen arranged in the tube.
All the experiments described above, in particular, the accurate ex­
periments carried out by the English physicist J. Thomson (1856-1940),
proved that the cathode rays are formed by fast electrons flying from the
cathode to the anode.
We can now easily explain the emergence of cathode rays in a gasdischarge tube. It was mentioned in Sec. 8.11 that in glow discharge the
positive ions of a gas fly to the cathode and knock out electrons from it.
Since the gas in the tube is rarefied, these electrons have time to cover a cer­
tain distance before colliding with the gas molecules. This explains the
existence of the dark cathode space. If the tube contains a considerable
amount of gas, cathode ray particles undergo collisions at a certain
distance from the cathode, and a glow (positive column) appears in the gas.
By reducing the pressure, we increase the mean free path of the electrons,
and as a result the dark cathode space increases, and the positive column
contracts. At a pressure of about 0.001 mm Hg, a considerable portion of
electrons are able to cover the entire wall-to-wall distance without colli­
sions, and the dark space fills the entire length of the tube. At the same
time, various other manifestations of cathode rays are observed:
luminescence of the glass, its heating, and so on. Thus, the reason behind
the emergence o f cathode rays lies in the intense bombardment o f the
cathode by positive ions which knock electrons out o f the metallic cathode.
It follows from what has been said above that in order to obtain
cathode rays, the tube must contain a certain (although small) amount of
gas. Therefore, if a gas-discharge tube is evacuated too strongly, neither
positive ions nor cathode rays will appear, and the highly rarefied gas will
be a good dielectric.
Moving between the cathode and the anode, electrons are accelerated
by the electric field and acquire huge velocities. For very strong fields these
velocities may reach 105 km/s and even more, approaching the velocity of
light (3 x 108 m/s) in specially made accelerators.
In Sec. 8.11, it was mentioned that the cathode in a glow discharge is con­
tinually bombarded by positive ions. This can be proved experimentally if
we make holes in the cathode of a gas-discharge tube (Fig. 175).
Obtaining of canal (positive) rays. A slight glow of the gas between the anode and cathode can
be seen. Individual beams of positive ions are formed behind the cathode.
A fraction of positive ions will fly through the holes, and a weakly
glowing radiation will be seen (in the dark room) to emanate from these
holes and propagate in the part of the tube behind the cathode. This radia­
tion, formed by positive ions of a gas used for the discharge, is known as
canal (or positive) rays. An analysis of the properties of these rays (deflec­
tion in electric and magnetic fields, particle charge, and so on) confirms
that these are indeed positive ions of the substances contained in the tube.
Chapter 8
of a parallel-plate charged capacitor. Will the beams behave identically if their velocities
are equal?
It was shown earlier (see Sec. 8.12) that when the gas in a tube is rarefied to
a sufficiently high extent, the conduction can be due to electrons emitted by
the cathode (cathode rays). However, as was mentioned above, the tube
must contain some amount of ions, in particular, positive ions, since elec­
trons are liberated from the cathode as a result o f its bombardment by
positive ions.
On the other hand, it is well known (see Sec. 7.5) that a sufficiently in­
tense emission of electrons can be ensured by using a strongly heated
cathode. In this case, electric current may exist in a tube with a high
vacuum. The role of positive ions becomes immaterial, and the entire cur­
rent is created by the electrons emitted by the incandescent cathode. Since
positive ions are now practically absent, the cathode does not experience
their bombardment. Therefore, to maintain it in the hot state required for
the emission of electrons, the cathode must be permanently heated, say,
with the help of a current passed through it from an auxiliary source
here is induced. Accordingly, the current-voltage characteristic in this case
has the shape of the curve shown in Fig. 149. The magnitude of saturation
current is determined by the number of electrons emitted by the cathode
per unit time, i.e. depends (see Sec. 7.5) on the temperature of the cathode,
its surface area and the material (work function).
If, however, the voltage has not reached the saturation value, not all the
electrons emitted by the cathode per unit time manage to reach the anode
during this time and participate in the current. A fraction of electrons re­
mains in the space between the cathode and the anode, forming a negative
volume charge which is accumulated in front of the cathode in the form of
a negatively charged cloud and suppresses the electric field of the anode.
The electrons continuously emitted by the cathode are partially repelled by
this cloud back to the cathode and never reach the anode. A current weaker
than the saturation current sets in. Thus, to every value of the voltage be­
tween the cathode and the anode, there correspond its own density of the
electron cloud and its own current. In this way, all points of the currentvoltage characteristic (Fig. 149), starting from 1 = 0 and to the saturation
current, are obtained. Only at sufficiently high voltage, all the electrons
escaping from the cathode reach the anode, the electron cloud completely
dissipates, and the current assumes its maximum value corresponding to
saturation.
Thermionic emission and electric current in vacuum caused by it form the
basis of a very large number of various electronic devices which have found
a very wide application in engineering and in everyday life. We shall discuss
here only two most important devices of this type: the vacuum tube (radio
valve) and the cathode-ray tube.
The schematic diagram of a simple vacuum tube is shown in Fig. 176. It
contains an incandescent tungsten filament 1, which is the source of elec­
trons (cathode), and a metal cylinder 2 (anode) embracing the cathode. The
two electrodes are placed into a glass or metal tube 3 from which air is
thoroughly pumped out. Such a two-electrode tube is known as a vacuum
diode.
A two-electrode tube (diode): 1 — cathode (incandescent filament), 2 — anode (cylinder), 3 —
glass tube. (b) Schematic diagram of a diode.
If we include this tube in the circuit of a battery or another current
source so that its anode is connected to the positive pole of the source and
the cathode to the negative pole (Fig. 177a) and heat the cathode with the
help of an auxiliary source (filament battery B{), the electrons evaporating
from the filament (cathode) will fly to the anode, and current will appear in
the circuit. If, however, we arrange the wires so that the minus of the
source is connected to the anode and the plus to the cathode (Fig. 177b),
the electrons evaporating from the cathode will be repelled by the field
rCDn battery Bt and the cathode is connected to the negative pole, (b) No current passes through the
diode when the anode is connected to the negative and the cathode to the positive pole of the
battery Ba. Bf is the filament battery.
back to the cathode, and there will be no current in the circuit. Thus, the
diode has the property to transmit the current in one direction and to pre­
vent it from flowing in the opposite direction. The devices which transmit
current only in one direction are known as rectifier valves. They are widely
used for rectifying alternating current, i.e. for transforming it into a direct
current (see Sec. 17.16). Vacuum diodes which are specially intended for
this purpose in industrial set-ups are called kenotrons.
More complex electron tubes, which are widely used in radio engineer­
ing, automatic control and other branches of technology contain, besides
the incandescent cathode (electron source) and the anode which collects
these electrons, a third, additional, electrode in the form of a grid arranged
between the cathode and the anode. The grid usually has large cells (it can
be made, for example, in the form of a spiral, Fig. 178).
The main idea on which the application of these tubes is based consists
in the following. Let us connect a tube in the circuit of battery Bt as shown
in Fig. 179 and heat the cathode with the help of an auxiliary battery B{
register an anode current 7a in the circuit. Let us now connect another bat­
tery Bg between the cathode and the grid of the tube, whose voltage can be
arbitrarily varied, and use it to change the potential difference U between
the cathode and the grid. It will be seen that the anode current changes in
this case. Thus, we get an opportunity to control the current in the anode
circuit o f the tube by varying the potential difference between its cathode
and the grid. This is the main property of electron tubes of this type.
The curve representing the dependence of the anode current /a of the
tube on the grid voltage Ug is called the current-voltage characteristic of the
A three-electrode tube: / — cathode (incandescent filament), 2 — anode (cylinder), 3 — grid
The voltage between the cathode and the grid changes the anode current.
tube. A typical current-voltage characteristic of a three-electrode tube is
shown in Fig. 180. This curve shows that when the grid is at a positive
potential relative to the cathode, i.e. is connected to the positive pole of the
battery, an increase in the grid voltage Ug leads to an increase in the anode
current until it reaches saturation. On the other hand, if the grid is made
voltage causes a decrease in the anode current until the tube becomes closed
at a certain negative potential of the grid. The current in the anode circuit
vanishes.
These phenomena can easily be explained. When the grid is charged
positively relative to the cathode, it attracts the electrons from the electron
cloud surrounding the cathode. In this process, a considerable fraction of
Chapter 8
Current-voltage characteristic of a triode.
electrons fly between the turns of the grid and get to the anode, con­
tributing to the anode current. Thus, promoting the dissipation of the
volume charge, the positively charged grid increases the anode current. On
the contrary, the negatively charged grid reduces the anode current since it
repels the electrons, i.e. increases the volume charge near the cathode.
Since the grid is much closer to the cathode than the anode, small varia­
tions of the potential difference between the grid and the cathode strongly
affect the volume charge and influence the anode current. In ordinary elec­
tron tubes, a change in the grid voltage by one volt changes the anode cur­
rent by a few milliamperes. In order to attain the same change in the cur­
rent by varying the anode voltage, the latter should be changed by several
tens of volts.
One of the most important applications of electronic tubes is their use as amplifiers of
weak currents and voltages. We shall demonstrate the principle of amplification with the help
of the following simple example. Suppose that a resistor R with a very high resistance (say,
Schematic diagram of connection of a triode as an amplifier of current and voltage.
Ug = iRg. In our example, this voltage is 1 V. But this change in the grid voltage changes the
anode current by 2-3 mA. Consequently, the change in the current through the grid resistor by
the anode battery.
Consequently, if we connect to the anode circuit a certain “load” resistance /?, equal, for
example, to 10 kfl, the change in the anode current by 2-3 mA will cause an increase in the
voltage across this resistor by 20-30 V. In other words, a change in the grid voltage by 1 V
changes the voltage between points a and b of the “load” resistor by 20-30 V. Therefore, we
have amplified the initial very small voltage.
The tubes with three electrodes (cathode, anode and grid) like the one
shown in Fig. 178 are known as triodes. In modern radio engineering,
more complex tubes with two, three and a larger number of grids are
employed. Tubes of various types and dimensions are manufactured at
present for various purposes, from so-called small-button glass tubes hav­
ing a thickness of a pencil and a few centimetres long to those exceeding the
size of an experimenter. In small tubes used in radio receivers, the anode
current amounts to several milliamperes, while in powerful tubes it reaches
many tens of amperes.
Why is the cathode of an electron tube rapidly destroyed if the tube is insufficiently evacuated and contains a small amount of a gas?
This important device (Fig. 182) resembles in appearance and construction
the tube used for investigating the effect of electric and magnetic fields on
cathode rays (see Fig. 172). The essential difference consists in that former­
ly we had a cold cathode which emitted electrons as a result of ion bom­
bardment. Now the electron source is an electron gun placed in the narrow
Schematic diagram of a cathode-ray tube.
part of the tube and consisting of an incandescent cathode (filament) 1
emitting electrons and anode 2 made in the form of a disc with a small hole
having a diameter of 1-3 mm. A potential difference from a few hundreds
to a few thousands of volts is created between the cathode and the anode so
that a strong electric field is formed in the space between them. This Held
accelerates the electrons emitted by the cathode to very high velocities. The
cathode is within a metal cylinder to which a positive (relative to the
cathode) voltage, which is slightly lower than the voltage at the anode, is
applied. The joint operation of this cylinder and the anode makes almost
Chapter 8
all electrons gather (be focussed) at the anode hole and emerge from it in
the form of a narrow pencil, viz. the electron beam. At the site where this
beam strikes the screen (the bottom of the tube covered by a luminescent
material), a bright glowing point appears.
On its way to the screen, an electron beam passes between two pairs of
metal plates 3 and 4. If a certain voltage is applied to the first pair of plates,
the field of capacitor 3 will deflect electrons flying through it towards the
positive plate, and the bright spot on the screen will be displaced to the left
or to the right along the horizontal. In the same way, if a voltage is applied
to the second pair of plates 4, the beam will be deflected towards the
positive plate, and the bright point on the screen will be shifted upwards
and downwards along the vertical.
Thus, from the displacement of the bright spot on the screen we can
judge about the voltage applied to the deflecting plates. It is very important
here that due to the negligible inertia of electrons, the electron beam
responds very rapidly to any variation of voltage on the plates. Therefore,
a cathode-ray tube can be used to trace the processes in which very fast
variations of voltage and current occur. The problems of this kind are very
important in radio engineering where currents and voltages varying a few
million times per second are employed.
A cathode-ray tube supplied with appropriate devices for investigating
such rapidly varying processes forms a device called the cathode-ray
oscillograph. This device is an important tool for investigations not only in
radio engineering but also in some other branches of science and
technology. It became a necessary part in research work of scientific and
industrial laboratories.
Another important field of application of cathode-ray tubes is televi­
sion. A cathode-ray tube is the most important part of any TV set. 6 By ap­
plying an appropriate voltage to the plates, the electron beam is made to
hatch the entire screen by a series of parallel lines (scan lines) at a high
speed. If the brightness of the luminescent point, determined by the kinetic
energy of electrons, remained constant all the time, the screen would be
seen as uniformly glowing. However, the signals transmitted by a television
broadcasting station and received by the TV set continually increase or
decrease the voltage accelerating the electrons depending on the brightness
of points of the picture being transmitted. Therefore, the points on the
screen have different brightnesses, the transmitted picture is reconstructed
and perceived by the human eye.
mainly used. — Eds.
cathode and an anode with a central hole, arranged opposite to the cathode and isolating
an electron beam. How does the velocity of electrons change if the voltage between the
cathode and anode has changed from 700 to 1000 V? What are the values of the velocity
in these cases? The electron charge and mass are 1.60 x 10” 19 C and 0.91 x 10” 30 kg
respectively.
a voltage of 800 V applied between the cathode and the anode. A parallel-plate capacitor
is arranged right in front of a luminescent screen so that electrons pass through the mid­
dle of the capacitor. The length of the capacitor plates is 8 cm, their separation is 2 cm,
and the voltage across them is 50 V. What will be the shift of the electrons* trace on the
screen (and in what direction will they be shifted)? If singly charged hydrogen ions (both
positive and negative) are present in the tube, how will they behave under these condi­
tions? What will be their shift on the screen (and in which direction)? First solve this
problem in the general form (analytically).
Electric Current in Semiconductors
It was mentioned in Sec. 1.2 that the overwhelming majority of substances
do not belong either to good dielectrics such as amber, quartz or porcelain,
tion between them. These materials are known as semiconductors. The
conductivities of various bodies vary over a wide range. Good dielectrics
have negligible conductivities from 10“ 8 to 10“ 18 S/m (see Table 2j, while
conductivities of metals, on the contrary, are quite large: from 106 to
between these extreme limits.
So-called electronic semiconductors present a special scientific and
technical interest. Like in metals, the passage of electric current through
such semiconductors does not cause any chemical transformations. This
leads us to the conclusion that free charge carriers in semiconductors are
electrons and not ions. In other words, these materials, just like metals,
have electron conduction. However, the fact that conductivities of metal
and semiconductors differ very sharply indicates that there must be a
rather deep qualitative difference in the conditions for the passage of elec­
tric current through metals and semiconductors. A number of other
peer arities in electric properties of semiconductors also points to the
essential difference in the conduction mechanisms of metals and semicon­
ductors.
The conductivity a is equal to the current passing through a unit crosssectional area under the action of electric field whose strength is 1 V/m.
This current will be the stronger, the higher the velocity u acquired by
charge carriers in this field, and the larger the number density n of charge
carriers, i.e. their number in a unit volume. In liquid and solid bodies, and
in gases under normal conditions, the velocity of carriers is proportional to
the field strength due to “friction* offered to moving charges. In these
cases, the velocity u corresponding to the field strength of 1 V/m is called
the mobility o f a charge.
If charges move along the field at a velocity w, all charges which are at a
distance u (or a smaller distance) from the unit cross section will pass
To the derivation of the relation a = nuq.
through it in a unit time (Fig. 183). These charges fill the volume u[m3],
their number being nu. The charge passing per unit time through the unit
cross section is equal to nuq, where q is the charge of a charge carrier. Con­
sequently,
a = nuq.
The difference in conductivities of metals and semiconductors is
associated with a very large difference in the number density of charge car­
riers. Measurements showed that 1 m3 of a metal contains 1028-1029 elec­
trons, i.e. to each atom of the metal there corresponds about one free elec­
tron. In semiconductors the number density of conduction electrons con­
stitutes a millionth fraction of this figure.
The other important difference in electric properties of metals and
semiconductors is that their conductivities depend on temperature in dif­
ferent ways. It is well known (see Sec. 3.10) that the resistance of metals in­
creases with temperature, i.e. their conductivity decreases. On the con­
trary, the conductivity of semiconductors increases with temperature. The
mobility of electrons in metals decreases as a result of heating, while in
semiconductors it may either increase or decrease with increasing
temperature depending on the temperature interval under investigation.
The fact that the conductivity in semiconductors increases with
temperature in spite of the fact that the mobility of charge csv riers
decreases indicates that with increasing temperature, the number o f free
electrons in semiconductors grows very rapidly, and the effect of this fac­
tor is stronger than that of decreasing mobility. At a very low temperature
ductors, and they behave as almost perfect dielectrics. Their conductivity is
extremely low in this case. As the temperature rises, the number of free
electrons rapidly grows, and at a sufficiently high temperature semiconduc­
tors may have a conductivity approaching the conductivity of metals.
This strong temperature dependence of the number of free electrons is
the most typical feature of semiconductors, which distinguishes them from
metals where the number of free electrons does not depend on temperature.
This property indicates that in order to transfer an electron in a semicon­
ductor from the ‘bound* state, in which it cannot move from atom to
atom, to the ‘free* state in which it freely wanders over the body, a certain
Chapter 9
energy W must be supplied to the electron. This quantity W9known as the
ionization energy, is different for different substances, but in general
ranges from several tenths of an electronvolt to a few electron volts.
For ordinary temperatures, the mean energy of thermal motion is much
lower than this value, but it is well known (see Vol. 1) that some particles
siderably exceed the mean value. A certain very small fraction of electrons
has a store of energy which is sufficient to bring them from the •bound* to
the *free" state. These electrons just ensure the passage of electric current
through semiconductors even at a room temperature.
As the temperature increases, the number of free electrons rapidly
grows. For example, if the energy W required for the liberation of an elec­
tron is equal to 1 eV at room temperature, only one electron per 1013 atoms
will have the thermal energy sufficiently high for its liberation. The number
density of free electrons will be very low (about 1016 m “ 3) but still suffi­
cient for producing measurable electric currents. If the temperature is
lowered to —80 °C, the number of free electrons will decrease to about
body will practically become a dielectric. If, on the contrary, the
temperature is raised to 200 °C, the number of free electrons increases
ductivity of the body will increase in spite of the decreasing mobility of free
electrons, which produces the opposite effect.
Thus, the principal difference between semiconductors and metals is
that a certain additional energy must be imparted to an electron in a
semiconductor to transfer it from the bound to the free state, while in
metals there is a large number of free electrons even at a very low
temperature. The forces of intermolecular interaction in metals are
themselves strong enough to liberate a part of electrons.
A very rapid increase in the number of free electrons with temperature in a semiconduc­
tor is responsible for the fact that the change in the resistance of the semiconductor with
temperature is 10-20 times greater than in a metal. The resistance of metals changes on the
average by 0.3% upon a temperature change by 1 °C, while in semiconductors the same
change in the temperature may cause a change in the conductivity by 3-6%, and an increase in
temperature by 100 °C increases their conductivity 50-fold.
Semiconductors intended for the employment of their very large temperature resistance
coefficient are known as temperature-sensitive resistors (thermistors). Temperature-sensitive
resistors have a lot of important applications in various branches of engineering: in automatic
control and telemetry and as very accurate and sensitive thermometers.
Resistance thermometers, or barretters \ were used in laboratories long ago. However,
they were formerly made of metals, which brought about considerable difficulties limiting the1
based on the change in electric resistance of a sensitive cell during its heating. — Eds.
range of their applicability. In order to make the resistance of a barretter high in comparison
with the resistance of the leads, the barretter had to be made of a long thin wire. Besides, the
change in the resistance of metals with temperature is very small, and hence the measurement
of temperature with the help of a metallic barretter necessitated a highly precise measurement
of resistance. Semiconductor barretters (thermistors) are free from these drawbacks. Their
resistivity is so high that a barretter can be few millimetres long and even fractions of a
millimetre in size. With such small dimensions, a thermistor acquires the temperature of the
surrounding medium very quickly, which makes it possible to measure the temperature of
small objects (say, the leaves of plants or regions on the skin of a human body).
The sensitivity of modern thermistors is so high that a change in temperature of one
millionth of a kelvin can be detected and measured with their help. This circumstance makes
them applicable in modern instruments instead of thermopiles (see Sec. 6.12) for measuring
the intensity of a very weak radiation.
In all the cases considered above, the additional energy required for the
liberation of an electron was imparted to it at the expense of thermal mo­
tion, i.e. at the expense of the internal energy of a body. However, this
energy can be transferred to electrons during the absorption of lutninous
energy by the body. The resistance of such semiconductors considerably
decreases under the action of light. This phenomenon is known as
photoconduction, or intrinsic photoelectric effect. 2 The instruments based
on this phenomenon are being used on industrial scale for signalling
systems and in automation.
Thus, only a small fraction of electrons in semiconductors is in the free
state and participates in the current. But it would be wrong to state that the
same electrons are perpetually in the free state while others are in the
bound state. On the contrary, two opposite processes occur in a semicon­
ductor simultaneously. On the one hand, the process of liberation of elec­
trons at the expense of internal energy or luminous energy takes place, and
on the other hand, the process of capture of free electrons, i.e. their recom­
bination with some of the remaining ions (viz. atoms that have lost their
electrons), is observed. On the average, every liberated electron remains
free only for a very short time (from 10“ 3*to 10“ 8 s). There is always a cer­
tain number of free electrons which continually change places with bound
electrons. The equilibrium between free and bound electrons is dynamic.
Semiconductors
It was shown in the previous section that electric current in semiconduc­
tors, just as in metals, is formed by the motion of electrons. However, the
leave the boundaries of the body as during the emission of electrons by an illuminated metal,
known as “extrinsic” photoeffect (see Sec. 1.9). These electrons remain in the body and just
change its conductivity.
Chapter 9
conditions and the nature of motion of electrons in semiconductors are
essentially different, which explains peculiar electric properties of semicon­
ductors.
The number density of free electrons in metals is very high so that most
of atoms are ionized. The conduction in a metal is practically due to the
motion of free electrons (see Chap. 7). In semiconductors, where the
which may play an equally important role in their conduction, must be
taken into account.
A comparatively small number of free electrons in a semiconductor is
detached from atoms which thus become ions. Each such ion is surrounded
by a large number of neutral atoms. The neutral atoms in the immediate
vicinity of an ion can easily transfer their electrons to it, thus making the
ion neutral and becoming ions themselves. Therefore, as a result of this ex­
change of electrons, the position of positive ions in the semiconductor
changes. In other words, a positive charge as if travels over the semicon­
ductor. Thus, along with the movement of free electrons, a process involv­
ing the displacement of positive charges also occurs in the semiconductor.
Unless an external field is applied to a semiconductor, these two pro­
cesses are random so that on the average to each electron displacement in a
certain direction there corresponds the displacement of another electron in
the opposite direction (the same applies to the displacement of positively
charged sites). If the field is applied, the two processes acquire a predomi­
are displaced along the field. These dominating displacements create a cur­
rent in the same direction (along the field), and the resultant conductivity is
determined by the two processes.
of semiconductor atoms with a positive ion 1 formed in a certain site,
under the action of the field an electron will be transferred from atom 2 to
ion 7, then from atom 3 to ion 2, from atom 4 to ion 5, and so on. As a
result, the positively charged site will be displaced in the opposite direction.
Thus .free electrons in a semiconductor move against the field; besides,
the transfer o f electrons from neutral atoms to positive ions, which is
equivalent to the motion o f a positive charge along the field, takes place.
The site in a semiconductor where a positive ion is located instead of a
formed partially by the motion of free electrons against the field and par­
tially by the motion of holes along the field. It should be borne in mind that
actually it is only electrons that move, but as a result of the motion of
formerly bound electrons from atoms to ions, positive holes seem to move.
Meeting a hole, a free electron can recombine with the positive ion. In this
"T "T •looooo
OfLOOOO
~j~ O O fL O O O
A rough model of a “hole” conduction in semiconductors: light circles are neutral atoms,
dark circle is a positive ion. Arrows indicate the direction of successive transitions of electrons
from neutral atoms to ions. The site of the positive charge is displaced in the opposite direc­
tion, viz. along the field.
case, the free electron and the hole vanish. This process is known as the
recombination.
In a perfectly pure semiconductor without any impurity to each elec­
tron liberated by the thermal motion or illumination there would corre­
spond a hole, i.e. the number of electrons and holes participating in current
would be the same.
However, perfectly pure semiconductors do not exist in nature, and
their artificial production is an extremely complicated process. Slightest
traces of an impurity radically change the properties of semiconductors. In
some cases, the effect of impurities is manifested so that the mechanism of
the “hole” conduction becomes virtually impossible, and the current in the
semiconductor is ensured only by the motion of free electrons. Such
semiconductors are known as electron semiconductors, or n~type semicon­
ductors (from the Latin negativus). In other cases, the motion of free elec­
trons becomes impossible, and the current is formed only by the displace­
ment of holes. Such semiconductors are called hole semiconductors, or
p ~type semiconductors (from the Latin positivus).
Naturally, along with p- and n-type semiconductors, there can be
mixed-type semiconductors in which both the electron and the hole con­
ductivities play noticeable roles. In particular, the pure semiconductor con­
sidered above exhibits conductivity of the mixed type.
Chapter 9
We shall explain the difference in the type of conductivity by considering as an example a
germanium semiconductor which is very important from the point of view of technical ap­
plications. Germanium is an element with the atomic number of 32 and the atomic mass of
group, it is tetravalent, i.e. has four bonds (valence electrons) by which it is linked with other
atoms. Figure 185 represents schematically the structure of a germanium crystal. The circles
with figures “ -I- 4” correspond to individual germanium atoms each of which is linked with its
Schematic diagram of germanium crystal: the circles with “ + 4” indicate germanium atoms,
those with “ + 5” and “ + 3” correspond to pentavalent arsenic and trivalent indium atoms in­
troduced into the germanium crystal.
four neighbours by double bonds (twin lines in Fig. 185). Each bond is created by the interac­
tion of a valence electron of a given atom with a valence electron of its neighbour. If under the
action of thermal motion or absorbed light an electron is detached at a certain site of the
crystal (point a in Fig. 185), a vacancy (hole) is formed, and the detached electron becomes
free. The motion of electrons and holes under the action of an electric field ensures the socalled intrinsic conductivity of germanium. The number of such carriers is comparatively
small: there are about 2.5 x 1019 electrons and holes in 1 m3 of germanium at room
temperature, while the number of germanium atoms in 1 m3 of the metal is equal to
Let us now suppose that a small impurity of a pentavalent element, say, arsenic, is in­
troduced into the germanium crystal, i.e. a small fraction of germanium atoms in the crystal is
replaced by arsenic atoms (point b in Fig. 185). An arsenic atom has five valence electrons
which link it with other atoms. When the arsenic atom is substituted for a germanium atom,
four of these electrons form strong bonds with the four neighbouring germanium atoms,
while the fifth electron turns out to be bound very weakly and it easily becomes free due to the
energy of thermal motion even at room temperature. Thus, each arsenic atom introduced into
germanium creates an extra free electron. On the other hand, the number of holes does not in­
crease in this case since the arsenic ion is strongly bound with its four neighbours by double
bonds, and transition of electrons from neighbouring neutral atoms to the arsenic ion is im­
possible. Even if the amount of introduced arsenic is small (for instance, it constitutes one
millionth of the number of germanium atoms), this impurity will produce 1022 additional elec­
trons in 1 m3 of a crystal, which is a thousand times larger than their number in pure ger­
manium, while the number of holes remains unchanged. In such a semiconductor the majority
of carriers are free electrons while holes are the minority. In other words, germanium with an
Let us now suppose that we have introduced in germanium an impurity of a trivalent ele­
ment like indium (point c in Fig. 185). Since an indium atom has only three valence electrons,
it will be tightly bound only with three neighbouring germanium atoms while the fourth bond
will be free. In these conditions, an electron from a neighbouring germanium atom can easily
leave the latter atom and fill this bond, while the atom will become an ion (hole) linked with
the neighbouring atoms only by three bonds. The indium atom will acquire a negative charge.
Then an electron from some other neighbouring atom can be detached and will fill the missing
bond of the ion, while this atom itself will become a positive ion, and so on. Thus, the site
where the positive charge is located will travel over the crystal. In a field, this displacement of
holes has a predominant direction: it occurs along the field, i.e. creates a current. Thus, the in­
troduction of an indium impurity into germanium increases the number of holes without alter­
ing the number of free electrons. Such a semiconductor is a hole {p-type) semiconductor, i.e.
holes are the majority carriers and electrons are the minority carriers in it.
The example of germanium with arsenic and indium impurities is relatively simple. In ac­
tual practice, more complex effects of impurities on electric properties of semiconductors are
observed. But at any rate, this example shows how even insignificant traces of impurities may
radically change the electric properties of semiconductors and the mechanism of the passage
of current through them. This creates considerable difficulties in the work with semiconduc­
tors on the one hand, and allows us to obtain semiconductors with various preset properties
on the other hand, making them applicable for solving very important and diversified
technical problems.
The difference between the electron and hole conduction in semiconductors allows us to
explain a number of facts which earlier seemed strange. For example, in Sec. 6.11, while con­
sidering semiconductor thermocouples, it was pointed out that in some cases the current in the
hot junction flows from metal to semiconductor, while in other cases in the opposite direc­
tion. We can now explain why it is so. In an electron semiconductor, the velocity of electrons
at the hot junction is higher than at the cold one. Therefore, the electrons penetrate (diffuse)
from the hot junction to the cold one until the electric field produced by this redistribution of
charges stops this flow of diffusing electrons. When the equilibrium sets in, the hot junction,
that has lost electrons, becomes positively charged, while the cold junction will be charged
cold junctions.
In a hole (p-type) semiconductor, on the contrary, holes diffuse from the hot junction to
the cold one. The hot junction will be charged negatively, while the cold one positively. The
sign of the potential difference between the hot and cold junctions will be negative.
A number of remarkable phenomena are observed at the contact between
two semiconductors with different conduction mechanisms (hole and elec­
tron). It turns out that the conductivity of the region of contact can be dif­
ferent depending on whether the electric field is directed from the p-type
semiconductor to the it-type semiconductor or has the opposite direction.
If, for example, we bring in contact cuprous oxide (Ci^O), which has the
hole conduction, and titanium dioxide (Ti02), possessing the electron con­
duction, the current from cuprous oxide towards titanium dioxide will be
voltage.
In order to find out the reason behind these phenomena, we must con­
sider the processes occurring in the so-called p-n junctions, i.e. on the
boundary between p- and /2-semiconductors. In the electron semiconduc­
tor, the majority carriers are free electrons whose number is much larger
than the number of holes. Conversely, in the hole semiconductor the
we bring the two materials in contact, electrons start to diffuse from the
^-semiconductor, where their number density is higher, to the
p-semiconductor, where they are deficient, in the same way as the atoms of
a dissolved substance diffused from the strong solution to a weak one in
contact with it. For the same reason, holes will diffuse from the hole
semiconductor to the electron semiconductor. As a result, the boundary
layer in both the semiconductors is depleted in the majority carriers, i.e.
the so-called barrier layer is formed at the boundary, whose resistance is
much higher than that of the bulk of the semiconductors. In fact, it is the
resistance of this barrier layer that determines the resistance of the two
bodies in contact.
A natural question arises: when will the diffusion of the holes from the
p-type semiconductor and the electrons from the /2-type semiconductor
cease? The answer to this question is as follows. Since positive charges
leave the p-type semiconductor and electrons arrive to it, this semiconduc­
tor acquires a negative charge in the boundary region. Similarly, the
boundary layer of the /2-type semiconductor acquires a positive charge
since holes arrive to it and electrons leave it. Thus, a double electric layer is
formed near the boundary, in which the field is directed from the /2-type to
the p-type semiconductor. In other words, this field opposes the diffusion
of electrons and holes (field E in Fig. 186). When the strength of this field
Electrons (n )______________________ Holes(p)
© © © © ©
© © © © ©
© © © © ©
© © © © ©
© © © © ©
© © © © ©
Emergence of a barrier layer at the boundary between n- and /7-type semiconductors: E —
electric field preventing the diffusion of electrons and holes.
attains such a value that its action balances the tendency of free electrons
and holes to diffuse to 'alien* regions, equilibrium is attained, and the dif­
fusion ceases.
Let us now suppose that a plate made of two different semiconductors
is connected to a battery so that the n-type semiconductor is connected to
the negative pole and the p-type semiconductor to the positive pole
layer having the largest resistance, will be directed from the p-type to the
towards each other. In this region, they may recombine, and new electrons
and holes will arrive to this region from the electrodes. The resistance of
the barrier layer will be relatively low, and the current in the forward direc­
tion will be large. If we now connect the positive pole of the battery to the
the external field will drive electrons and holes away from the boundary in
the opposite directions (Fig. 1876), the barrier layer will become wider,
and the resistance of the semiconductors will sharply increase.
The motion of free electrons (circles with the “ —” sign) and holes (circles with the “ + ” sign)
through ap-n junction: (a) forward connection; (b) backward (cutoff) connection.
It is clear now that this mechanism explains the rectifying action of the
so-called copper-oxide and selenium rectifiers, which were developed in a
purely empirical way before an idea of physical processes occurring in them
was clearly formulated. A copper oxide rectifier is a copper plate coated at
a temperature of 1000 °C with a layer of cuprous oxide (CujO). This layer
is saturated with oxygen at about 600 °C and then rapidly cooled. The
layer of copper monoxide (CuO) formed on the surface of cuprous oxide is
then dissolved by an acid, and the cuprous oxide is coated by a layer of
metallic copper.
If a plate manufactured in this way is connected to the circuit of a bat­
tery (Fig. 188), it turns out that when a current is passed from cuprous ox­
ide to the copper plate, its magnitude is very large, i.e. the resistance of the
plate is very low. If we reverse the polarity of the battery, i.e. make the cur­
rent flow from the copper plate to cuprous oxide, the current becomes
thousands times weaker, since in this direction the resistance of the plate is
thousands times higher. Thus, the plate is an electric rectifier similar to a
diode (see Sec. 8.16): it transmits the current in one direction and almost
Chapter 9
When a copper-oxide rectifier is connected according to circuit diagram (a), strong current
passes through it, while for the connection according to diagram (b), the current is very weak,
I — cuprous oxide enriched by oxygen, 2 — sprayed copper, 3 — cuprous oxide, 4 — copper.
does not transmit it in the opposite direction. This is explained by the fact
that the basic copper electrode is coated by the layer of cuprous oxide con­
taining impurities of copper and other metals. This layer is an rt-type
semiconductor. On the other hand, the outer layer of cuprous oxide
enriched by oxygen is a/7-type semiconductor. Thus, in the bulk of cuprous
oxide there is a p-n junction, i.e. there exists a boundary between thep - and
rt-type semiconductors. The barrier layer appears here, which ensures the
conduction in only one direction.
The same properties are exhibited by a selenium rectifier. It consists of
a selenium layer applied to a nickel-coated iron plate. The selenium layer is
covered by the second electrode made of cadmium-tin-bismuth alloy. After
a long-term heating and passing a current, such a system also acquires the
property of unilateral conduction. In selenium rectifiers, the barrier layer is
formed at the boundary of selenium (/7-type semiconductor) and cadmium
selenide which appears during the treatment of the plates and has n-type
conductivity.
At present, semiconductor rectifiers made of germanium, silicon and other semiconduc­
tors have found a wide application in technology (especially in radio engineering). It was
shown in the previous section that the nature of conduction in germanium can be changed by
introducing a small amount of impurity atoms of a certain type. If, for example, a small piece
of indium is melted on the surface of germanium having the electron conduction, a thin sur­
face layer into which indium atoms penetrate becomes a hole conductor, and a p-n junction
will be formed in the bulk of germanium, possessing a rectifying property (unilateral conduc­
tion). Figure 189 shows the construction of a germanium rectifier of this type. Its current-
Germanium rectifier: {a) general view; (b) cross section: I — germanium plate, 2 — tungsten
spring with pointed end, 3 — ceramic cylinder, 4 — brass holders, (c) notation.
Voltage-current characteristic of a germanium rectifier.
voltage characteristic (i.e. the curve describing the dependence of the current through the rec­
tifier on the voltage applied to it) is presented in Fig. 190. This curve shows that the current in
the forward direction attains the value of 1 A at a voltage of 0.75 V, i.e. the resistance of ger­
manium in this direction is very low. In the cut-off direction, the current is very weak (about
Chapter 9
occurs.3
Germanium, silicon and other semiconductors with a p-n junction are used at present in
semiconductor amplifiers (transistors) which replace triode amplifiers. In many respects,
these devices have considerable advantages over vacuum electron tubes since they are much
smaller in size, have much longer service life and consume less energy than electron tubes.
If the outer electrode of a semiconductor rectifier (copper-oxide, selenium
or silicon) is made so thin that it is transparent, the illumination of the
semiconductor connected to an electric circuit causes a current in it
tor plate becomes a generator o f electric current in which the luminous
energy is transformed into the electric energy.
When illumination is strong semiconductor photocells may produce
considerable emf (up to 1 V) and current. The efficiency of the best
photocells exceeds 20%. For this reason, it is possible now to speak about
photocells as sufficiently effective current sources. These sources are refer­
red to as solar batteries since they can be used for direct transformation of
the solar radiant energy into the electric energy. Silicon solar batteries are
used, for one, in energy supply of artificial satellites of the Earth and on
spaceships. Semiconductor photocells are also employed for measuring il­
luminance and in automation, signalling systems and telemetry.
rG n When a semiconductor photocell is illuminated by light, a current emerges in the circuit: (a)
general view of the set-up; (b) circuit diagram of the experiment.
— Eds.
Basic Magnetic Phenomena
Before we go into further studying of magnetic phenomena, let us recall
some well-known facts.
small iron objects like filings or nails brought close to them (Fig. 192a). If
we suspend a piece of such an ore on a string, it will arrange itself in the
direction from North to South (Fig. 192b). Pieces of such ores are known
as natural magnets.
A natural magnet: (a) magnetic ore attracts iron filings; (b) magnetic ore suspended on
a string is arranged from North to South.
An iron nail brought to a magnet is magnetized and attracts
iron filings.
A piece of iron or steel placed in the vicinity of a magnet becomes
magnetized, i.e. acquires the ability to attract other iron objects (Fig. 193).
The magnetic properties of this piece of iron or steel are manifested the
stronger the closer it is to the magnet. When the piece of iron and the
magnet are brought in contact, magnetization attains the maximum value.
Chapter 10
When the magnet is removed, the piece of iron or steel magnetized by
it loses a considerable part of the acquired magnetic properties but still re­
mains magnetized to a certain extent. Thus, it becomes an artificial magnet
which possesses the same properties as the natural magnet. Thisr can be
verified with the help of the following simple experiment. A steel bar 1
an extent that is capable to keep a load consisting of several similar bars
chain is kept by the forces of magnetic attraction which balance the force
of gravity acting on the bars. If we move the magnet a bit away, holding
the upper bar in hands, the chain breaks down: the bars are demagnetized
so that each of them is unable to hold the lower bars |(Fig. 194/6).
However, each bar has retained a certain amount of magnetization. It is
sufficient to insert the bar into iron filings to see that they will be attracted
to its ends.
Magnetization of iron objects becomes stronger as they are moved closer to a magnet: (j) bar
chain of 2-5 bars; (b) when the magnet is separated from bar 7, magnetization becomes
weaker, and the chain breaks.
The magnetization that took place when the piece of iron was in contact
with the magnet is called temporary magnetization in contrast to the
residual magnetization which remains when the magnet is removed.
Experiments of this kind demonstrate that residual magnetization is
generally much weaker than temporary magnetization. For soft iron, it
constitutes only its small fraction.
Both residual and temporary magnetizations are different for dif­
ferent grades of iron and steel. Temporary magnetization of soft, annealed
iron is considerably stronger than for nonannealed iron or steel. On the
contrary, residual magnetization of steel, especially of some grades con­
taining, for example, cobalt admixtures, is sufficiently stronger than the
residual magnetization of soft iron. Thus, if we take two identical bars one
of which is made of soft iron and the other of steel and place them in the
vicinity of the same magnet, the iron bar will be magnetized stronger than
the steel bar. If, however, we remove the magnet, the iron bar will be
demagnetized almost completely, while the steel bar will retain a noticeable
part of its initial magnetization. As a result, the steel bar will become a con­
siderably stronger permanent magnet than the iron bar. For this reason,
permanent magnets are always made of special grades of steel and not of
iron.
Artificial magnets obtained simply by an arrangement of a piece of
steel near a magnet or by touching it are rather weak. Stronger magnets are
obtained by rubbing a steel plate by a magnet in one direction. However, in
this case too we obtain a weaker magnet than the one with the help of
which the magnetization was carried out. All kinds of shocks and shakings
during magnetization facilitate it. On the contrary, the shaking of a perma­
demagnetization.
Residual magnetization depends not only on the material but also on the shape of the body
being magnetized. As was mentioned above, comparatively short and thick bars of soft iron
are demagnetized almost completely after the removal of the magnet. If, however, the same
iron is used for manufacturing a wire whose length is 300-500 times larger than its diameter,
this wire (unwound or uncoiled) will retain its magnetization to a considerably larger extent.
that this attraction balances the force of gravity, and the ball can hang in air without a
support. Is this equilibrium stable? In what direction will the ball move if we slightly
raise or lower it from the equilibrium position?
also lies on this support. The cube slides over the glass. Will it move uniformly, with a
uniform acceleration, or with an increasing acceleration?
Let us see whether the magnetic properties of a natural or artificial magnet
are the same at different points on its surface. Let us take an iron ball fixed
to one end of a weak helical spring. We touch with this ball a point on the
surface of the magnet and then detach it by stretching the spring (Fig. 195).
The extension of the string at the moment of detachment will give us a
visual idea about the force required to overcome the attraction the ball ex­
periences at the given point of the magnet. It turns out that at some points
points (at the middle of the magnet) the ball is practically not attracted to
the magnet. For the same reason, iron filings, in which a magnet is immers­
ed and then taken out, form thick beards at the magnet ends and do not
stick to the middle of the magnet (Fig. 196).
Chapter 10
The force of attraction is weak at the middle of a
magnet and strong at the ends. This can be judged from
the extension of the spring at the moment when the iron
ball is separated from the magnet.
Iron filings form a “beard” at the ends of a magnet
h u t a re n n t a t t r a r t e d to its m id d le
The parts of the surface of a magnet at which the attraction of iron ob­
jects is noticeably manifested are called the magnet poles, while the part of
the magnet surface where the forces of attraction are not exhibited or are
very weak is known as the neutral zone of the magnet.
Artificial magnets are usually made in the form of bars (straight or
resembling a horse shoe, Fig. 197). As a rule, such magnets have the poles
<a> Typical shapes of permanent bar magnets: (a) straight and (b) horse-shoe shape. To store a
magnet its ends are connected by an iron bar (armature) in order to protect them from
demagnetization.
at the ends and the neutral zone at the middle. It is possible, however, to
magnetize a piece of steel so that it has not 2 but 4 ,6 ,... poles separated by
single pole does not exist.
The ratio of sizes of the pole regions and of the neutral zone depends on
the shape of the magnet.
If a magnet is made in the form of a very long and thin rod, the pole
regions almost contract to the points at its ends, while the remaining sur­
face constitutes the neutral zone. The elongated magnet of this type can be
referred to as a magnetic needle. A magnetic needle is often made in the
form of an elongated rhombus (Fig. 198). If such a needle is suspended or
Magnetic needles in the form of an elongated rhombus: suspended on a string (left) and fixed
on a point (right).
fixed at a point so that it can freely rotate, it is always arranged so that one
of its poles is directed to the North while the other to the South. Any
magnet suspended on a thin readily twisting string is oriented in the same
way. The pole of a magnet facing the North is known as the north pole,
while the other pole is the south pole.
Magnetic needles are very convenient for analyzing the magnetic prop­
erties of a natural or artificial magnet. Bringing a magnet to a needle, we
see that its north pole is attracted by the south pole of the magnet and is
repelled from the magnet’s north pole (and vice versa) so that under the ac­
tion of the magnet the magnetic needle rotates about its pivot. A magnet
approaching an iron body first of all magnetizes it, i.e. converts it into a
weak magnet which is rotated by the permanent magnet and is attracted by
it. Using a magnetic needle, we can always distinguish between a nonmagnetized piece of iron and a magnet. Bringing a magnet to the end of the
or the unlike poles of the needle and the magnet under investigation are
brought to each other. If, however, a piece of nonmagnetized iron is
brought close to one end of the needle, attraction will always be observed
since the piece of iron is always magnetized in such a way that the end
closest to the pole of the needle acquires the opposite polarity (naturally,
the polarity of the far end of the piece of iron will be opposite to that of the
tion, but its interaction with the needle will be much weaker, and we shall
observe only the interaction of the unlike poles, viz. the attraction of the
Chapter 10
magnetized without using any other objects?
bar be identified without using other bodies except the bars?
Simple electric and magnetic effects were known from ancient times.
Apparently, about 600 B.C. Greeks knew that a magnet attracts iron
and amber rubbed by cloth attracts light objects like straws. However, the
difference between electric and magnetic attractions had not been deter­
mined, and these phenomena were considered to be of the same nature.
A clear demarcation between these phenomena was made by the English physician and
corporibus, et de magno magnete tellure (On Magnet, Magnetic Bodies and the Earth as a
Large Magnet) in 1600. This book marked the beginning of scientific investigation into elec­
tric and magnetic phenomena. Gilbert described in this book all the properties of magnets
known at that time and presented the results of his own very important experiments. He also
indicated a number of essential differences between electric and magnetic attractions and in­
troduced the term “electricity”.
After Gilbert’s work had been published, the distinction between electric and magnetic
phenomena was indisputable, but nevertheless a number of facts pointed to an inseparable
link between these phenomena in spite of their differences. The most striking facts weie those
of magnetization of iron objects and magnetization reversal of compass’ needles under the ac­
tion of lightning. In his work Thunder and Lightning, the French physicist D.F. Arago
off the shore was struck by a lightning which considerably damaged her masts, sails, etc.
When the night fell, it was found from the position of stars that from the three compasses
available, two were pointed to the South instead of North, while the third was pointed to the
West. Arago also described the case when a lightning struck a house and strongly magnetized
steel knives, forks and other objects.
At the beginning of the 18th century it was established that lightning is
in fact a strong electric current passing through air. Therefore, the facts
like those described above lead to the conclusion that electric current
possesses magnetic properties. However, these properties of current were
observed experimentally and studied only in 1820 by the Danish physicist
H. Oersted (1777-1851).
the meridian (i.e. in the North-South direction) (Fig. 199a). The needle is
known to arrange itself also along the same line, and hence it is approx­
imately parallel to the wire. But as soon as we turn the key and let the cur­
rent pass through wire 1, we shall see that the magnetic needle turns tend­
ing to arrange itself at right angles to the wire, i.e. in the plane perpen-
Oersted’s experiments with a magntic needle reveal the existence of the magnetic field of a cur­
rent: 1 — wire, 2 — magnetic needle suspended in parallel to the wire, 3 — galvanic cell bat­
tery, 4 — rheostat, 5 — key.
dicular to it (Fig. 1996). This experiment indicates that in the space around
a current-carrying conductor, there appear forces causing the motion of
the magnetic needle, i.e. the forces similar to those acting in the vicinity of
forces, in the same way as the forces acting on electric charges are called
electric forces.
In Chap. 2 we introduced the concept of electric field to denote a
special state of the space* which is manifested in the action of electric
forces. Similarly, we shall call the magnetic field the state of the space
which is manifested in the action of magnetic forces. Thus, Oersted’s ex­
periment shows that magnetic forces emerge in the space surrounding a
current, i.e. a magnetic field is produced.
The first question posed by Oersted after he had made his remarkable
discovery was whether or not the material of the wire influences the
magnetic field created by the current. He considered that connecting wires
Chapter 10
can be formed by a few wires or strips, and the nature of the metal does not
alter the result (probably, it affects only the magnitude of the effect).1The
same result was observed when the wires of platinum, gold, silver, brass
and iron were used, or tin and lead strips or mercury. Oersted carried out
all his experiments with metals, i.e. conductors with electron-type conduc­
tion. However, Oersted’s experiments can easily be made if a metal con­
ductor is replaced by a tube containing an electrolyte or a tube in which a
gas discharge occurs. Such experiments were described in Sec. 3.2 (Fig. 73),
where it was shown that although the electric current in these cases was due
to the motion of positive and negative ions, its action on a magnetic needle
was the same as in the case of a metallic conductor. Irrespective of the
space around it, which turns the needle so that it tends to orient itself at
right angles to the direction of the current.
Thus, we can state that a magnetic field appears around any current.
This fundamental property of electric current has already been mentioned
by us (see Sec. 3.2) when we discussed in detail its other effects (thermal
and chemical).
The creation of a magnetic field is the most typical of the three proper­
ties of electric current described above. A current produces a chemical ac­
tion in one type of conductor (electrolytes) and not in others (metals). The
amount of heat liberated by current can be larger or smaller depending on
the resistance of a conductor. In superconductors current may not be ac­
companied by a liberation of heat (Sec. 3.11). On the other hand, the
magnetic field is inseparably linked with electric current. It does not de­
pend on some special properties of a conductor and is determined only by
the magnitude and direction of the current. Most of technical applications
of electricity are also associated with the presence of the magnetic field of
the current.
Oersted’s discovery stimulated a keen interest and triggered a number of
remarkable investigations which proved the identity of magnetic effects of
currents and permanent magnets. We shall consider some of these
phenomena in greater detail.
tery (as was the case in Oersted’s experiment), they could have different currents, and hence
the magnetic effects of these currents were different. But it should be borne in mind that
Oersted’s experiment preceded the establishment of Ohm’s law and the concept of resistance
of conductors depending on material.
But does a magnet act on a current?
We place a bar magnet on the table and suspend a conductor parallel to
the magnet on flexible metal wires supplying current to it and at the same
time allowing the conductor to rotate (Fig. 200o). As soon as we switch on
the current, conductor 1 will turn, tending to align itself at right angles to
magnet 2 (Fig. 200b).
An inverse of Oersted’s experiment; (a) the current is switched off, (b) when the current is
switched on, conductor 1 tends to arrange itself at right angles to magnet 2.
Another version of this experiment is shown in Fig. 201. A flexible con­
ductor 1 is suspended near a magnetized rod 2 (Fig. 201a). When the cur­
rent passes through the conductor, each of its segments experiences the ac­
tion of a force tending to align this segment at a right angle to the magnet.
Under the action of these forces, the conductor is wound around the
magnet when the current is switched on (Fig. 201b). This experiment shows
that the magnet acts on the current-carrying conductor, and each segment
of the conductor experiences the action of a magnetic force.
One more experiment in which these forces are manifested is
represented in Fig. 202. Frame 1 made up by a few turns of wire is freely
suspended between the poles of a fixed magnet 2 (Fig. 202a). Current can
be supplied to the frame through terminals 3. When the current is switched
on, the frame is oriented at right angles to the line joining the magnet poles
galvanometers for measuring direct currents (see Sec. 14.4).
The experiment on deflection of cathode rays by a magnet described in
Sec. 8.13 is also a manifestation of the action of the magnet on current
Chapter 10
An inverse of Oersted’s experiment; (a) the current is switched off; (b) when the current is
switched on, conductor 1 is wound around magnet 2.
since the cathode-ray beam is nothing but an electric current.
A magnet is able to magnetize iron and attract it. Does electric cur­
rent possess this property? As far back as in 1820, Arago noted that if a
current-carrying wire is immersed into iron filings, pieces of iron stick to it
as to a magnet. The “beard” of filings grows on the wire. If the current is
switched off, the filings immediately fall down. In this experiment, the
material of the conductor is of no importance. Normally, copper conduc­
tors are used. In order to prevent current from passing through the filings,
the wire must be insulated by a coating. At a strong current, it is sufficient
to bring the wire close to the filings instead of immersing it.
Later, Arago and Ampere worked out a method of strong magnetiza­
tion of iron and steel with the help of an electric current. They wound a
wire in the form of a spiral consisting of a large number of turns and placed
a steel needle into such a coil. A strong electric current was passed through
the spiral, and then the needle was taken out. The needle turned out to be
When the current is switched on, frame 1 is arranged perpendicularly to the line connecting
the poles of magnet 2; (a) current is switched off; (b) current is switched on.
magnetized. One of its ends was the north pole and the other the south
pole. A reversal of the direction of the current led to the reversal of the
poles.
A magnetic needle which can rotate freely about a vertical pivot is
known to orient itself in a certain direction, viz. approximately from North
to South. Does the Earth exert the same orienting action on currents? In
the same year (1820) Ampere discovered the orienting action of the Earth
on a current loop.
Ampere’s device consisted of a wire loop 1 in the form of an almost
closed ring having a diameter of 40 cm or a rectangular frame (Fig. 203a).
The ends of the loop are arranged exactly one below the other at a small
distance. They are connected to two steel points 2 immersed into vessels
filled with mercury and connected to the terminals of a battery. Owing to
this construction, the loop can freely rotate on the points without inter­
rupting the current in the circuit. The same effect is observed if the frame is
simply suspended on flexible metal wires as in the experiment described in
approximately arranged in the West-East direction. Thus, the action of the
magnetic field of the Earth on the current loop is the same as on a compass
Chapter 10
Ampere’s device for detecting the effect of the magnetic field of the Earth on a current loop;
dian; (b) the current loop is replaced by a coil.
The orienting action of the Earth on a current loop becomes especially
clear if a coil (or solenoid) consisting of a large number of turns is used in­
stead of the current loop (Fig. 203b).
Ampere also discovered a new and extremely important
phenomenon, viz. the interaction of two current-carrying conductors. If,
for example, two long flexible wires are arranged parallel to each other and
a current is passed through them, the wires will repel each other if the cur­
rents in them have opposite directions (antiparallel) (Fig. 204«r) and will at­
tract each other if the currents are parallel (Fig. 204b). The movements of
conductors caused by their interactions can be of various types depending
on their shape, mutual arrangement and the way they are fixed. The experi­
ment illustrating the nature of interaction between two current-carrying
solenoids is shown in Fig. 205. It should be noted that the movements
Thus, a current-carrying solenoid is similar in its magnetic properties to a
magnetic needle.
These experiments lead to the conclusion that the magnetic action o f
magnets is completely identical to magnetic action o f currents with an ap­
propriate choice o f current and the shape o f the conductors.
it it
directions, (b) Two parallel conductors attract each other if the currents in them have the same
direction. Dashed lines show the positions of the conductors in the absence of current.
Solenoid 7 is fixed while solenoid 2 is suspended on a flexible conductor. When the current is
switched on, solenoid 2 turns so that the direction of currents in solenoids 7 and 2 is the same,
is attracted to solenoid 2 and is fitted on it. (b) When the current in one of the solenoids is
reversed, solenoid 2 is repelled from solenoid 7, is rotated through 180° and is again fitted on
solenoid 7.
*} in the coils. What will be the arrangement of the poles and neutral zones in the needle
when the currents in the coils have (a) the same (Fig. 206cr) and (b) the opposite directions
'TFVfTf
HTlTfT'
y r ffT F
i il i i i i ! (
v w v w0
■WVWW
w it To Exercise 10.4.1.
Coulomb’s Experiment
How does the magnetic field of permanent magnets emerge? What are the
physical processes which convert an ordinary nonmagnetized steel bar into
a magnet? These fundamental questions continue to attract the attention of
researchers.
When magnetic phenomena began to be investigated, the fact of the ex­
istence of poles in magnetized bars, where the magnetic properties are
manifested especially clearly, drew the attention of scientists. It was ob­
vious that the two poles are different so that each pole of a magnet attracts
one of the poles of another magnet and repels the other pole. In order to
explain these phenomena, Gilbert put forth the hypothesis of the existence
of “magnetic charges” in nature, viz. the north and the south charges
which interact like electric charges.
These ideas were further developed by Coulomb. Using a torsion balance described in Sec.
each pole can be characterized by a certain “amount o f magnetism”, or “magnetic charge”,
the law of interaction of magnetic poles being the same as the law of interaction of electric
charges (see Sec. 1.10): like poles repel each other, while unlike poles attract each other with a
force which is directly proportional to “magnetic charges” concentrated at these poles and is
inversely proportional to the square o f the distance between them. Thus, if one of the poles is
characterized by a “magneic charge” M and the other by a “magnetic charge” m, and the
distance between the poles is r, the force of interaction between the poles is
F = where k is the proportionality factor which depends on the choice of units.
On the basis of Coulomb’s experiments, the measure of magnetic field strength was taken
as the force exerted by a magnetic field on a unit magnetic charge. If a force F acts on a
magnetic pole containing a “magnetic charge” m> the magnetic field strength is given by
H = - .
The magnetic field strength was assigned a direction coinciding with the direction of the force
exerted on the north pole of the magnet.
Coulomb himself paid attention to an important and far-reaching dif­
ference between electric and magnetic phenomena. This difference lies in
the fact that electric charges can be separated, and an excess of positive or
A comparison of electrostatic changing by induction of a piece
of metal (left) and magnetization of a steel bar under the effect
of a magnet (right).
r :cr
single pole cannot be obtained. Moreover, the two poles of any magnet
represent equal “amounts of magnetism” so that we cannot obtain a body
which would contain an excess of north or south magnetism.
In order to explain this difference, let us recall the experiment on elec­
trostatic induction (see Sec. 1.8) and try to make a similar experiment with
a magnet. Figure 207 (left) shows an experiment on electrostatic charging
of a body by induction, while the diagram on the right represents a similar
experiment on magnetization by induction. When a piece of metal 2 is
brought close to a (say, positively) charged body 1, a negative charge will
appear on the end which is closer to the charged body, while the far end
will acquire a positive charge. Similarly, when a steel bar 4 is brought close
to a (say, north) pole of magnet 3, the south pole will be induced on the
moment, the analogy is complete. But the further course of events is quite
different. If we divide an electrically charged piece of metal into two parts
and draw them apart, one part will be charged negatively (i.e. will have an
excess of negative charge) and the other part will be charged positively. If,
however, we divide the magnetized steel bar into two parts, it can easily be
seen that each half will be a magnet with two poles, arranged as shown in
continued as long as desired, but each small piece of magnet will be a
magnet with two poles.
It is impossible to separate the poles in any way, i.e. a body with a
single pole cannot be obtained. The impossibility to separate the north and
south magnetisms in a body led Coulomb to the conclusion that these two
types of magnetic charges are inseparably linked in each elementary parti­
cle of a magnetized body. In other words, it was admitted that every small
part of this substance (atom, molecule or a small group of atoms and
molecules) is a sort of a small magnet with two poles at the ends. In this
way. Coulomb arrived at a very important hypothesis about the existence
of elementary magnets with inseparably linked poles.
Then how should we visualize the process of magnetization of iron
from this point of view? We must assume that in a nonmagnetized piece of
iron there already exist elementary magnets described above, but they all
are arranged at random (chaotically). Small magnets are oriented in all
possible directions without any order, the number of magnets oriented with
their north poles in one direction being approximately equal to their
The magnetization process from the point of view of the Coulomb hypothesis: {a) random
distribution of elementary magnets in a nonmagnetized iron; (b) their ordered arrangement in
magnetized iron placed in a magnetic field.
actions of all these elementary magnets are mutually balanced, and the
piece of iron as a whole is nonmagnetized. When we place this piece of iron
in a magnetic field, say, by bringing it to a magnet or placing it in a currentcarrying coil, the magnetic field makes the elementary magnets to turn and
line up in chains as shown in Fig. 208b. Here the action of opposite poles in
the bulk of the magnet is cancelled out, and magnetic poles appear at the
ends of the bar. Thus, the magnetization o f a body is the ordering in the
orientation o f its elementary magnets under the action o f an external
magnetic field, i.e. it is a process similar in many respects to the polariza­
tion of dielectrics (see Sec. 2.26).
The discoveries by Oersted and Ampere led to a new and more profound
idea about the nature of magnetic phenomena. Proceeding from the identi­
ty of the magnetic effects of magnets and appropriately chosen currents
established in these experiments, Ampere refuted the concept of the ex­
istence of special magnetic charges in nature. According to Amp&re, an
elementary magnet is a circular current within a small particle o f matter: an
atom, molecule, or a group o f atoms. During magnetization, a certain frac­
tion of these currents is oriented in parallel as shown in Fig. 209 (Ampere’s
currents).
It was mentioned in Sec. 10.4 that in its magnetic properties, a circular
current is quite similar to a short magnet whose axis is perpendicular to the
plane of the current. Therefore, the system of oriented molecular currents,
schematically shown in Fig. 209, is completely equivalent to a chain of
elementary magnets in Coulomb’s hypothesis.
•0 -e-f-e0 0 0 0
QA-0—0 —6 —0--9--Q -- •0---5
ro o o o o o o
Ordered arrangement of Ampere’s currents in magnetized iron placed in a magnetic field.
Thus, Ampere’s theory has rejected the hypothesis that special
magnetic charges exist in nature, and provided the explanation of all
magnetic phenomena with the help of elementary currents. A deeper
analysis of the properties of magnetized bodies has shown that the
hypothesis o f magnetic charges or elementary magnets is not only
superfluous but also wrong and cannot be reconciled with some experimen­
tal results. These results will be considered later in this book (Sec. 16.4).
From the point of view of Ampere’s theory, the inseparability of north
and south poles considered in the previous section becomes perfectly clear.
Every elementary magnet is a circular current loop. It was shown above
that one side of this loop corresponds to the north pole and the other side
to the south pole. For this reason, the north and south poles cannot be
separated just as one side of a plane cannot be separated from the other.
Chapter 10
Thus, we arrive at the following fundamental result.
There are no magnetic charges in nature. Each atom o f a substance can
be regarded from the point o f view o f its magnetic properties as a circular
current. The magnetic field o f a magnetized body is made up o f the
magnetic fields o f these circular currents.
In a nonmagnetized body, all elementary currents are arranged at random, and hence no magnetic field is observed in the surrounding space.
The process o f magnetization o f a body consists in that its elementary
currents are oriented more or less in parallel under the action o f an external
magnetic field and produce the resultant magnetic field .
The importance of Ampere’s theory was beyond doubts. However, his idea about the ex­
istence of elementary currents perpetually circulating in the particles of matter was revolu­
tionary for that time. Further evolution of science showed that these concepts are a natural
consequence of the atomic theory created in the 20th century. An atom is a system of a central
positively charged nucleus and electrons rotating about it like planets about the Sun. The mo­
tion of electrons creates circular currents within atoms. Special experiments were carried out
which proved that magnetization is accompanied by the orientation of the axes of these cir­
cular currents tending to be arranged in parallel.
These visual ideas about the structure of atoms are very rough and hence inaccurate, but in
general they describe the essence of phenomena fairly well.
Magnetic Field
The space surrounding a magnet or a current-carrying conductor is in a
special state which we associate with the term “magnetic field” (see
Sec. 10.3). It expresses the idea that mechanical forces acting on other
magnets or current-carrying conductors are manifested in this space.
However, these actions are not the only manifestation of magnetic field. A
magnetic field is pronounced. For example, a magnetic field changes the
electric resistance of various metals. Some bodies change their size in a
magnetic field, and so on.
The most strong effect is produced by a magnetic field on the electric resistance of
bismuth which led to the construction of a bismuth “field meter” . Bodies made of substances
capable of strong magnetization (iron, nickel, cobalt) change their dimensions under the ac­
tion of magnetic field. This phenomenon, known as magnetostriction, has a number of im­
portant applications: it is used for exciting very fast vibrations of small iron rods producing
very short acoustic waves (ultrasonic waves).
When the action of a magnetic field is different at its different points,*
the field is said to be nonuniform. Any manifestation of a magnetic field
could be used as its quantitative measure. In actual practice, it turns out to
be more convenient to characterize a field by mechanical forces exerted by
it on magnets and current-carrying conductors.
It was indicated in Sec. 10.4 that the magnetic field produces an orient­
ing action on a magnetic needle or a current loop, tending to arrange the
direction. This direction is taken for the direction of the magnetic field.
For the magnetic field of the Earth, this direction is from North to South.
It was shown in Vol. 1 that the rotation of a body is caused by a mo­
ment o f force (we called it the torque). The concept of torque becomes very
visual for a force couple (Fig. 210). If each force F is equal to 1 N and the
arm / is 1 m, the torque is
M = FI = 1 N- m.
Torque M = FI; O O ' is the axis about which the couple
causes rotation.
Experiments show that the torque M is proportional to the sine of the angle
a between the direction of the field and the direction of a magnetic needle
imum value when a = tt/2 and becomes zero when a = 0 or ir.
By analogy with the electric field which is characterized by a vector
quantity E called the electric field strength (see Sec. 2.3), the magnetic field
is characterized by a vector quantity B which is called the magnetic induc­
tion for historical reasons (it would be more correct to call this quantity the
magnetic field strength in analogy with E).
For the direction of vector B, we take the direction in which a magnetic
magnetic induction is determined from the maximum torque Mmax (cor­
responding to a = 7r/2, see above) acting on the needle or the current loop.
If the magnetic induction of a field has the same magnitude and direction
at all points, the magnetic field is called uniform (cf. Sec. 2.6).
If closed current-carrying conductors tpiane loops) of various sites and
shapes are placed in a uniform magnetic field and the maximum torque
Mmax acting on them is measured, it turns out that this torque is (a) propor­
tional to the current / in a loop; (b) proportional to the area S bounded by
the loop, and (c) for the loops with the same area S, Mmax does not depend
on the shape of the loop (i.e. is the same for circular, rectangular,
triangular loops and for those of irregular shape). Thus, the maximum
torque turns out to be proportional to the quantity
which is known as the magnetic moment of a current loop.
The dependences mentioned above make it possible to characterize the
magnitude of vector B in terms of the maximum torque Mmax acting on a
loop with a magnetic moment pm equal to unity. Consequently, we can
write
Pm where Mmax is the maximum torque acting in a given field on a current loop
with a magnetic moment pm. If the field is nonuniform, the numerical
value of B at a given point can be determined by placing at this point a loop
whose size is small in comparison with distances over which the field
changes noticeably, and by determining the torque Afmax acting on this
loop.
In the previous section it was found that the action of a magnetic field on a
plane current loop is determined by the magnetic moment pm, which is
equal to the product of the current / in the loop and the area S of the loop:
pm = I S (see (11.1.1)).
The unit of magnetic moment is an ampere-square metre (A • m2). In
order to give an idea of this quantity, it can be pointed out that a circular
current loop of radius 0.564 m (x x 0.5642 = 1) with a current of 1 A or a
rectangular loop with a side of 1 m has a magnetic moment of 1 A • m2. If
the current is 10 A, the magnetic moment of 1 A • m2 corresponds to a
current loop having a radius of 0.178 m (x x 0.1782 = 0.1), and so on.
An electron moving in a circular orbit with a high velocity is equivalent to a circular cur>
rent equal to the product of the electron charge e by the frequency n of the electron rotation in
the orbit: / = en. If the radius of the orbit is r and the electron velocity is v, n — v/2icrf and
hence / = ev/2xr. The magnetic moment corresponding to this current is
evr Pm The magnetic moment is a vector quantity, whose direction coincides
with the normal to the loop. From the two possible directions of the nor­
mal, the one associated with the direction of the current in the loop
through the right-hand screw rule is chosen (Fig. 211). The rotation of a
Rotation of the head of a screw in the direction of current / causes the displacement of the
screw in the direction of vector n.
right-handed screw in the direction of the current in the loop causes the
displacement of the screw in the direction of the normal n. The normal
Chapter 11
chosen in this way is referred to as positive. The direction of vector pm is
assumed to coincide with the direction of the positive normal n.
We can now modify the definition of the direction of magnetic induc­
tion B. For the direction of magnetic induction B we take the direction in
which the positive normal to a current loop is arranged by the action of the
field, i.e. the direction in which vector pm is oriented.
The SI unit of magnetic induction is a tesla (T) after the Serbian scien­
tist N. Tesla (1856-1943). A tesla is the magnetic induction o f a uniform
fie ld in which a plane current loop having a magnetic moment o f \ A ■m2
experiences the maximum torque equal to 1 N *m.
It follows from formula (11.1.2) that
magnetic field is acted on by a maximum torque of 2 x 10“ 5 N • m. What is the magnetic
induction of this field?
the loop forms an angle of 30° with the direction of the field?
in a circular orbit of a radius of 0.529 x 10“ 10 m at a velocity of 2.19 x 10^ m/s. The
electron charge is 1.60 x 10“ 19 C.
Magnetic Needle
In order to measure the magnetic induction of a field, a magnetic needle
can be used (we shall take it in the form of a long thin magnetized knitting
will arrange itself (with the string untwisted) so that the north pole will
point in the direction of the field. If we now turn the needle at right angles
to the direction of the field by twisting the string, the value of the max­
imum torque A/max can be determined from the torsion angle. If we knew
the magnetic moment p m of the needle, we could obtain the value of B from
formula (11.1.2) by dividing Mmax by p m.
The difficulty of this method lies in that the magnetic moment of the
magnetic moment of the needle can be determined only experimentally.
For this purpose, the needle must be placed in a field with a known induc­
tion B and the maximum torque A/max acting on it in this field must be
measured. Then p m can be found by dividing Afmax by B.
Having made such a standard needle , we can use it for measuring the
magnetic induction B.
However, the manufacturing and storage of standard magnetic needles
is fraught with considerable difficulties since the magnetic properties of a
preferable to proceed in a different way. A standard magnetic field is pro­
duced, i.e. the field with a constant and a preset magnetic induction.
Knowing the current and the shape and size of the coil, we can calculate the
magnetic induction of the field produced by this coil (see Sec. 12.3). The
magnetic induction of any field of interest to us can then be compared with
the magnetic induction of such a standard field. For comparison we can
use any magnetic needle, and there is no need to know its magnetic mo­
ment.
Indeed, suppose that the measurements of the torque for the standard
magnetic field Bst yielded the value Mmax, while for the field B under in­
vestigation this value is M ^ . The measurements were carried out with the
same magnetic needle whose magnetic moment p m is unknown. From for­
mula (11.1.2) we have
^m ax
P m -® st9
^m ax
~ Pm Hence
II bo bo Mmax _ PmB
Mmax PmBst
SI Mm ' ax i.e. the unknown magnetic moment does not appear in the final result.
The magnetic induction of a field is characterized by its magnitude and
direction. Therefore, it can be depicted in the form of a segment whose
direction coincides with the direction of the magnetic induction and whose
length represents the magnitude of the magnetic induction on a certain
scale.
Let some magnets or currents produce at a point O a field with a
magnetic induction B, (Fig. 212). Suppose now that we have removed the
magnets and currents producing the field Bj and replaced them with other
magnets or currents producing a field with a magnetic induction ^ . Let us
sources creating the fields Bj and B2 and acting simultaneously. Ex­
periments show that the resultant field is represented by the diagonal of the
parallelogram constructed on segments B{ and B j.
Composition of magnetic inductions of two fields.
This result indicates that the magnetic inductions o f fields are com ­
posed according to the parallelogram rule . This points to the independent
action o f magnetic field s } As in the case of electric field (see Sec. 2.4),
these experiments prove that the magnetic induction of a field is a vector
quantity.
acting in the westward direction and equal to 0.004 T) are composed at a certain point.
What is the magnitude and direction of the magnetic induction of the resultant field?
time: a field with the horizontal (westward) component of 0.005 T and the vertical
downward component of 0.004 T, and a field with the horizontal westward component
of 0.006 T and the vertical downward component of 0.001 T. Solve the problem
analytically and graphically.
second field is in the southward and not westward direction.
with the vertical. Decompose the induction into the vertical and horizontal components
and calculate their magnitudes.
In Sec. 2.6, we considered a convenient and visual way of graphic represen­
tation of electric fields with the help of electric field lines. The same ap­
proach can be used for magnetic field.
As in the case of electric field, the magnetic fie ld tines are the lines the
tangents to which at each poin t indicate the direction o f the fie ld at this
poin t (Fig. 213). In other words, if we imagine that a free small magnetic
ranged along the tangent to the field line at this point so that its north pole
indicates the direction of the magnetic field line.
There is a simple method of obtaining line patterns of various magnetic
fields. It is similar to the method of obtaining line patterns of electric
fields, described in Sec. 2.6. We place a piece of cardboard or glass on a
magnet, pour some filings on this cardboard or glass, and slightly shake it
to facilitate the movements of individual filings. The filings will arrange
See footnote 1 to Chap. 16.
Construction of magnetic field lines.
themselves in the form of chains. These chains have the shape of the field
lines. Indeed, each piece of iron is magnetized in the field of the magnet
and becomes a small magnetic needle which is oriented in the direction of
the magnetic induction of the field at the corresponding point. Figure 214
Magnetic field patterns obtained with the help of iron filings; (a) magnetic field around a
current-carrying conductor; (b) magnetic field of a horse-shoe magnet.
represents magnetic line patterns for different magnetic fields. These pat­
terns give clear qualitative representation of a magnetic field. Just as in the
case of electric fields, the magnetic field lines can be used for characterizing
magnetic induction. For this we should agree to draw field lines so that
their density, i.e. the number of lines per unit area, corresponds to the
magnitude of the magnetic induction of the field. Thus, we shall obtain
“magnetic maps” similar to “electric maps” in the way of their construc­
tion and in applications (see Sec. 2.7). However, magnetic maps differ in
their form from electric maps, the principal difference being that the
magnetic field lines are always closed as can be seen from Fig. 214.
Chapter 11
It was mentioned in Sec. 11.3 that we can use a magnetic needle suspended on an elastic string
to compare the magnetic induction of different fields. We can also use for this purpose a tor­
sion balance similar to the Coulomb torsion balance (Sec. 1.10), with the head graduated for
measuring torsion angles of the string and the position of the needle points determined with
the help of the scale on the external cylinder. Such an instrument can be called a
magnetometer. Unlike a free needle, the needle suspended on an elastic string will be in
equilibrium only when the torque produced by the field is equal and opposite to the torque of
the twisted string. If the needle is oriented along the magnetic field (a = 0), i.e. M = 0, the
string must not be twisted (zero position). Having twisted the string to a certain angle, we can
attain equilibrium for any orientation of the needle. The torque acting on the string (and
hence the torque of the field) is determined from the torsion angle by calculations or
preliminary graduation of the instrument (see Vol. 1). Thus, the maximum torque Mmax
which corresponds to a = 90° can be determined, i.e. the position in which the direction of
the needle is perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field.
It is not difficult to construct such a static magnetometer, but instruments of this kind are
measure the torque acting on a magnetic needle by observing the needle oscillations. A
magnetic needle shifted from its equilibrium position in a magnetic field performs several
oscillations about this position before it returns to it like a pendulum displaced from the
equilibrium position. If the needle has a considerable mass and experiences small friction, it
may perform many oscillations before it comes to a halt. Therefore, the period of oscillations,
i.e. the time during which an oscillation is completed (from an extreme position and back),
can be measured quite accurately. Calculations of these oscillations show that the period is the
smaller, the larger the torque exerted by the field on the needle, i.e. the larger the magnetic in­
duction of the field. Thus, by comparing the oscillation periods for the same needle in dif­
ferent fields, we can reliably compare the magnitudes of magnetic induction of different
fields. Such dynamic magnetometers are successfully used for measuring the magnetic induc­
tion of weak fields like the magnetic field of the Earth.
Besides the methods based on the measurement of the torque, exerted by the field on a
magnetic needle, the magnetic induction of the field can be measured with the help of other
phenomena revealing the effects of magnetic field (see Sec. 11.1). For example, the property
of bismuth to alter its electric resistance under the action of magnetic field is often used for
this purpose. A flat spiral made of a bismuth wire (Fig. 215) is placed in a magnetic field
A bismuth spiral for measuring magnetic induction.
under investigation. Having measured the resistance of the spiral in the field and outside it, we
can judge about the magnetic induction of the field from the change in the wire resistance.
Naturally, the bismuth spiral must be preliminarily graduated, i.e. the variation of its
resistance in magnetic fields with known induction must be determined. Figure 216 shows by
way of example a curve used for graduating the instrument. Bismuth spirals can be used for
measuring strong fields, say, the fields of electromagnets whose induction is a thousand times
stronger than that of the magnetic field of the Earth.
Resistance R of bismuth against magnetic induction B. The resistance of bismuth outside the
field, R Q, is taken for unity.
resistance of a bismuth spiral is 26 Q if in the absence of the field its resistance is 20 0.
Magnetic Field of Current
Circular Current Loop. Right-Hand Screw Rule
The patterns of magnetic field lines obtained by the method described in
Sec. 11.5 give a visual idea about the magnetic field emerging in the space
surrounding a current-carrying conductor.
help of iron filings for the fields of a long straight conductor and of a cir­
cular current loop. Analyzing these patterns, we first of all pay attention to
the fact that magnetic field lines are closed. This is a general and very im­
portant property of magnetic field lines. Irrespective of the shape of
current-carrying conductors, the magnetic field lines are always closed, i.e.
have neither beginning nor end. In this respect, the magnetic field essentially
differs from the electric field whose lines, as was shown in Sec. 2.7., always
start from some charges and terminate at other charges. It was shown, for
example, that electric field lines terminate on the surface of a metallic
body, which turns out to be charged, and the electric field does not
penetrate into the bulk of metal. On the contrary, observations of magnetic
fields show that their lines never terminate on a surface but penetrate into
the body. When the magnetic field is produced by a permanent magnet, it
is not easy to establish this fact since iron filings cannot be used for tracing
processes occurring in the bulk of iron. However, thorough experiments
show that in this case too the magnetic field passes through iron and its
lines are connected to themselves, viz. are closed.
Magnetic field pattern for a circular current loop.
This fundamental difference between the electric and magnetic fields is
associated with the fact that electric charges do exist in nature while there
are no magnetic charges. For this reason, electric field lines go from charge
to charge, while the magnetic field has neither beginning nor end, and its
lines are always closed.
If in the experiments on obtaining magnetic line patterns filings are
replaced by small magnetic needles, their north poles will indicate the direc­
tions of magnetic field lines, viz. the direction of the magnetic field (see
Sec. 11.5). Figure 218 shows that if the direction of current is reversed, the
Relation between the direction of current in a straight conductor and the direction of the
magnetic field lines due to this current: (a) the current flows downwards; (b) the current flows
upwards.
To the right-hand screw rule.
To Exercise 12.1.2.
direction of the magnetic field created by it also changes. The relationship
between the directions of current and the magnetic field produced by it can
easily be memorized with the help of the right-hand screw rule (Fig. 219).
I f a right-handed screw is rotated so that it translates in the direction o f
the current, the direction o f rotation o f its handle will indicate the direction
o f the field {magnetic field lines).
In this form, this rule is very convenient for determining the direction
of the field around a long straight conductor. For circular conductors, the
same rule can be applied to each of its segments. It is still more convenient
to formulate the right-hand screw rule for circular conductors as follows.
I f a right-handed screw is rotated so that it moves in the direction o f the
field, the direction o f rotation o f its handle indicates the direction o f the
current.
It can easily be seen that the two formulations are completely identical
and can be applied equivalently for determining the relation between the
direction of the current and the magnetic induction of the field for any
shape of conductors.
parallelogram (Fig. 220). What is the magnetic induction of the field at the centre O of
the parallelogram? What will be the direction of the magnetic induction at point O if the
branch acb of the parallelogram is made of a copper wire, while the branch adb is made
of an aluminium wire of the same cross section?
angles to each other (Fig. 221). Point O is at the middle of the shortest distance between
To Exercise 12.1.3.
To Exercise 12.1.5.
the straight lines (segment ef). The currents in ab and cd are equal and have the directions
indicated by the arrows. Determine graphically the direction of vector B at point O. In­
dicate the plane containing this vector. What is the angle between this vector and the
plane passing through ab and ejl
tion of current in cd is reversed, and (c) the directions of currents in both conductors are
reversed.
tically and horizontally (Fig. 222). The directions of currents are indicated by the arrows.
Determine graphically the direction of vector B at the centre O of the loops. What angle
does this vector form with the plane of each loop? Make the same construction having
reversed the direction of current first in the vertical loop, then in the horizontal loop, and
finally in the two loops.
Measurement of the magnetic induction at different points of the field
around a current-carrying conductor shows that the magnetic induction at
each point is proportional to the current in the conductor. But for a given
current, the magnetic induction is different at different points of the field
and depends in an extremely complicated way on the size and shape of the
current-carrying conductor. We shall limit ourselves to an important case
when these relations are comparatively simple. This is the magnetic field in
a solenoid.
Solenoid and a Bar Magnet
A long cylindrical coil consisting of a certain number of wire turns wound
along a helix is called a solenoid. The magnetic field created by the current
passing through this coil can be represented as the result of superposition
of the fields produced by separate closely spaced turns. Figure 223 shows
how the magnetic line pattern changes as the number of turns is increased.
Magnetic field patterns for a solenoid obtained with the help of iron filings for different
Chapter 12
When the length of a coil is considerably larger than its diameter, the
magnetic field lines inside the solenoid have the form of straight lines
parallel to its axis (Fig. 223d). This means that at all points in the solenoid,
the magnetic induction has the same direction: it is parallel to the solenoid
axis. Only near the ends of the solenoid the magnetic lines are bent. Out­
side the solenoid, the magnetic Held is similar to the field of a bar magnet
Magnetic field lines: (a) for a bar magnet; (b) for a long solenoid. The ends of the winding
lead to a battery which is not shown in the figure. The arrows indicate the direction of current
in the winding and the direction of the magnetic field inside and outside the solenoid.
in the same way as in the case of a bar magnet they go from one pole to the
other. The shape of the lines outside the solenoid is also similar to that of
the corresponding bar magnet.
By measuring in some way or another the magnetic induction of the
field near a solenoid and near a bar magnet, we can verify that their fields
are identical not only in the pattern of magnetic lines but also in the
distribution of magnetic induction if the shape of the solenoid and the cur­
rent in it are chosen appropriately. In a solenoid, we can also find a neutral
zone and the north and south poles, so that outside the solenoid the
magnetic field is directed from the north pole to the south pole as for the
bar magnet. A solenoid suspended on a string is oriented in the magnetic
field of the Earth as a suspended bar magnet. Two solenoids or a solenoid
and a magnet interact like two magnets, and so on.
The apparent difference consists in that the solenoid not only attracts
iron filings, other magnet or solenoid, but can also pull them inside. But
this difference is only due to the fact that the solenoid interior can be
penetrated, while an iron bar is impenetrable. The similarity becomes com­
plete if the space in a solenoid is filled by a solid body, for example, if the
solenoid is wound on a wooden cylinder. The presence of wood in the
solenoid practically does not affect the solenoid magnetic field either inside
or outside it. The magnetic field lines, as before, have neither beginning
the south pole outside the solenoid, and from the south to the north pole
within it (Fig. 224).
be too long, two turns (in the horizontal plane) are made at its middle. Draw the
magnetic field lines assuming that the current flows downwards. Mark the north and
south poles of the two turns. What will happen if we reverse the current?
the emergence of the magnetic field due to the current is undesirable. In such in­
struments, the so-called bifilar winding is used: a folded wire (so that both its ends are
kept together) is wound on the rod. Explain the principle of operation of the bifilar wind­
ing. rent in the solenoid in the clockwise direction?
To Exercise 12.2.4.
The magnetic Held in a solenoid whose length is considerably larger than its
diameter is of special interest. In such a solenoid, the magnetic induction
has the same direction parallel to the solenoid axis everywhere, and hence
the Held lines are parallel to one another.
By measuring in a certain way the magnetic induction at different
points in the solenoid, we can verify that if the winding of the solenoid is
uniform 1, the magnetic induction in the solenoid has not only the same
direction at all points but also the same numerical value. Thus, the field in
a long solenoid with a uniform winding is uniform. Henceforth, while
speaking about the field in a solenoid we shall always refer to such “long”
uniform solenoids and shall not pay attention to distortions in the regions
of the field close to the solenoid ends.
Similar measurements made for different solenoids with different cur­
rents showed that the magnetic induction in a long solenoid is proportional
to the current I and the number o f turns per unit length o f the solenoid, i.e.
to the quantity n = N //, where N is the total number of the solenoid turns
and I is its length. Thus,
B = monl,
where m0 is the proportionality factor called the magnetic constant (cf. the
electric constant e, Sec. 1.11). The numerical value of the magnetic con­
stant is
M0 = 4ir X 10“ 7 T • m /a.
Later (Sec. 17.7) it will be shown that the dimensions of the quantity m0 can
be referred to as henry per metre, where henry (H) is the unit of induc­
tance. Consequently, we can write
Mo = 4ir X 10-7H/m.
Because of its simplicity, the magnetic field of a solenoid is used as a stan­
dard field.
In addition to magnetic induction B, magnetic fields are also
characterized by a vector quantity H known as the magnetic field strength.
In vacuum, the quantities B and H are just proportional to each other:
B = m0H
so that the introduction of the quantity H does not bring about anything
tween B and H has the form
B= where /x is a dimensionless characteristic of a substance known as the
relative permeability, or simply the permeability of the substance. For the
analysis of magnetic fields in a substance like iron, the quantity H turns out
to be helpful. We shall discuss it in greater detail in Sec. 16.1.
It follows from formulas (12.3.1) and (12.3.3) that when a solenoid is in
vacuum, the magnetic field strength is
H = n l,
i.e. it is said to be equal to the number o f ampere-turns per metre.
It was established from measurements of the magnetic induction of the
field produced by a current in a very long straight conductor that
where / is the current in the conductor and r is the distance from it.
According to formula (12.3.6), the strength of the magnetic field pro­
duced by a straight conductor in vacuum is
According to this formula, the unit of magnetic field strength is an ampere
per metre (A/m). The ampere per metre is the magnetic field strength at a
distance o f one metre from a thin and very long conductor carrying a cur­
rent o f 2ir amperes.
the solenoid if its length is 30 cm and the number of turns is 120?
described in the previous problem if it is stretched to 40 cm or compressed to 10 cm?
What will happen if the solenoid is folded at the middle so that the turns of one its half lie
between the turns of the other half?
circuit. How will the magnetic field in the solenoid behave if the diameter of its turns is
reduced to 5 cm but the length of the solenoid remains the same and the same piece of
wire is used? How can the initial magnetic induction of the field be obtained without
changing the length and the diameter of the turns of the solenoid?
solenoid containing 40 turns. The same current of 2 A passes through both solenoids.
What is the magnetic induction of the field in the two solenoids if their north poles are (a)
at the similar ends and (b) at the opposite ends?
Chapter 12
of turns of 1500, 1000 and 600 respectively. The current of 1 A flows in the first
solenoid. What must be the currents in the second and third solenoids for the magnetic
induction to be the same in all the solenoids?
lem 12.3.5.
long solenoid. The current in the solenoid is 5 A. What must be the number of turns in
it? the total number of turns is 500, and the current in it is 0.1 A? What will be the change in
the magnetic induction if the solenoid is stretched to 50 cm and the current in it is re­
duced to 10 mA?
In Sec. 10.3 it was emphasized that the magnetic field is produced by any
current irrespective of the mechanism of conduction in any particular case.
On the other hand, we know that any current is the motion of individual
electrically charged particles, viz. electrons and ions. Hence we can draw
the conclusion that the magnetic field is produced due to the motion o f
charged particles (electrons or ions). In other words, any moving particle
creates its own magnetic field, and the field we observe is the result of the
superposition of magnetic fields produced by individual moving particles.
In particular, the electron beam in a cathode-ray or discharge tube (on
cathode rays see Secs. 8.12 and 8.13) must produce a magnetic field in the
surrounding space. It was mentioned earlier (Sec. 8.13) that cathode rays
are deflected by a magnet just like a current. But if a magnet deflects
cathode rays, they must in turn deflect a light magnetic needle, i.e. produce
a magnetic Held in the surrounding space. Indeed, the magnetic field of
cathode rays was discovered in direct experiments. Experiments were also
carried out in which the emergence of a magnetic field as a result of a sim­
ple motion of charges, viz. in a sufficiently rapid movement of a charged
body of conventional size, was observed (in Rowland and Eichenwald ex­
periments).
The Rowland and Eichenwald experiment consists in the following. A current is passed
through a circular wire loop. It is well known that this current produces a magnetic field that
can be detected from the deviation of a magnetic needle suspended on a string near the loop.
loop in the plane of the figure and the magnetic needle perpendicular to the figure. The top
right-hand part shows the loop perpendicular to the plane of the figure and the magnetic nee­
dle lying in this plane. The dashed line in the lower part is the trajectory of a charge moving in
a circle. The deflection of the magnetic needle caused by this motion is the same as in the case
of the current in the loop.
fixed to a thoroughly insulated axle. The disc (ring) can be charged and rotated at a very high
speed about the axle. A magnetic needle 2 protected by a metal shell from external fields is
placed above the disc. A small mirror 3 is fixed to the string on which the needle is suspended.
The deflections of the needle can be watched with the help of this mirror and a telescope
through window 4. The experiment revealed that during the rotation of the disc, the needle is
deflected in just the same way as when an electric current of the appropriate direction and
magnitude is passed along the wire loop. If the direction of rotation of the disc or the sign of
the charge is reversed the deflection of the needle will be also reversed.
These experiments prove that a moving charged body produces in the
surrounding space the same magnetic field as a conventional electric cur­
rent. They confirm the assumption put forth above that the observed
magnetic Held is the result of the superposition of magnetic fields produced
by individual moving charged particles, viz. electrons and ions.
Magnetic Field of the Earth
It was indicated in Sec. 10.1 that a magnetic needle suspended on a thread
or placed on a point is oriented in a certain way (approximately in the
direction from North to South) at any point near the Earth surface. This
important fact means that the Earth creates a magnetic field.
The study of the magnetic field of the Earth is of fundamental impor­
tance for practical and scientific purposes. From ancient time, compasses
have been employed, viz. the instruments where the magnetic field of the
Earth is used for the orientation relative to cardinal points. A conventional
field compass is shown in Fig. 227.
A compass.
Lines of the magnetic field of the Earth.
In modern sea and air navigation, the magnetic compass is no longer
the only tool for orienting and determining the course of a ship or
aeroplane. There are also other instruments for this purpose. However, the
magnetic compass has by no means lost its significance. It still remains an
important instrument for navigators. All modern ships and aircrafts are
supplied with magnetic compasses. Compasses are also widely used by
geologists, hunters and travellers.
The existence of the magnetic field of the Earth makes it possible to
carry out a number of other important investigations. Among them the
methods of exploration and study of iron deposits should be singled out.
The magnetic map of the earth’s magnetic field is shown schematically
in Fig. 228. It can be seen that the magnetic field of the Earth has such a
form as if the globe were a magnet with the axis directed approximately
from North to South. In the northern hemisphere, all magnetic field lines
converge to a point having the coordinates of 75°50' N and 96° W. This
point is known as the south magnetic pole of the Earth.1 In the southern
hemisphere, the point of convergence of magnetic field lines lies at
It should be noted that the points of convergence of magnetic field lines of
the Earth lie not on the surface of the Earth but rather below it. It can be
seen that the magnetic poles of the Earth do not coincide with its
geographical poles. The magnetic axis of the Earth, viz. the straight line
passing through both the magnetic poles, does not pass through its centre
and hence is not the Earth’s diameter.
grills are magnetized with time. Explain this phenomenon. What conclusion can be
drawn about the direction of magnetic induction of the Earth’s field? Which end of a
vertical bar (upper or lower) becomes the north pole?
the following experiment in his book. If one strikes an iron bar oriented from north to
south with a hammer, the bar will be magnetized. Explain this phenomenon. Indicate the
position of the north and south poles of the bar magnetized in this way.
was used in the construction of magnetic mines which were fixed at a certain depth under
the surface of water and exploded when the ship passed above them. The mechanism that
makes a mine go to the surface and explode is switched on when a magnetic needle
rotating about a horizontal axle is turned under the action of the magnetic field of the
ship passing above the mine. The ship always turns out to be spontaneously magnetized
used: the mine-sweeping and the neutralization of the magnetic field of the ship.
The first method consists in carrying a strong magnet suspended on cables from an
aeroplane flying at a small altitude above the region which has been mined. Sometimes, a
circular cable is put on floats on the water surface and current is passed through it.
Under the action of the field of the magnet or current, the mechanisms of all mines are
switched on, and the mines explode without producing any damage.
The other method consists in that loops of insulated wire are attached to the ship,
and current is passed through them so that the magnetic field of this current is equal and
opposite to that of the ship (which is a permanent magnet). When superimposed, these
fields cancel each other, and the ship floats over a mine without triggering its
mechanism. Indicate the direction of current in a loop arranged in the horizontal plane
the direction of the current in the cable important in the first method?
time.
Chapter 13
anced by weights. In what way will the equilibrium of the beam balance be violated if the
rod is magnetized so that its north pole is at the bottom?
the orientation of an aeroplane near the pole since ordinary magnetic compasses fail to
operate properly in this region and are practically useless. Why is that so?
Since the magnetic and the geographical poles of the Earth do not coincide,
a magnetic needle indicates the north-south direction only approximately.
The plane in which the magnetic needle arranges itself is known as the
magnetic meridian plane at a given point, while the straight line along
which this plane intersects the horizontal plane is called the magnetic meri­
dian. The angle between the directions of the magnetic and the geographic
meridians is termed the magnetic declination and usually denoted by the
Greek letter <p. The magnetic declination is different for different regions
on the globe.
Depending on the position of a point on the surface of the Earth, the
The arrangement of a magnetic needle relative to the cardinal points: (a) in the regions with
eastern magnetic declination; (b) in the regions with western magnetic declination.
from the magnetic meridian plane, and accordingly the magnetic declina­
tion is western or eastern (Fig. 229). The scale of magnetic declination
ranges from 0 to 180°. The eastern declination is often denoted by the plus
sign, and the western declination by the minus sign.
of the Earth’s field does not lie in the horizontal plane passing through a
given point but forms a certain angle with this plane. This angle is termed
the magnetic dip (angle of inclination). The magnetic dip is denoted usually
by i. Magnetic dip is different for different points on the surface of the
Earth.
A clear idea about the direction of the magnetic induction of the
Earth’s magnetic field at a given point is given by a magnetic needle fixed
so that it can rotate freely both about the vertical and the horizontal axis.
This can be done with the help of the so-called gimbal suspension shown in
tion of the field.
A magnetic needle fixed on a gimbal suspension is arranged along
the magnetic induction of the magnetic field of the Earth.
The magnetic declination and magnetic dip (angles <p and i) completely
determine the direction of the magnetic induction of the Earth’s field at a
given point. It remains for us to determine the numerical value of this
quantity. Let the plane P in Fig. 231 be the magnetic meridian plane at a
given point. In this plane, the magnetic induction B of the Earth’s magnetic
field can be decomposed into two components: the horizontal component
Bh and the vertical component Bv. If we know the angle i (magnetic dip)
and one of the components, we can easily calculate the other component or
vector B. If, for example, we know the magnitude of the horizontal com­
ponent B1], from the right triangle we obtain
B = COS /
and Bv = B, tan /.
In actual practice, it is more convenient to measure directly just the
horizontal component of the magnetic field. For this reason, the magnetic
induction of the Earth’s field at a certain point on the surface of the Earth
is often characterized by its horizontal component.
Chapter 13
Decomposition of the magnetic induction of the magnetic field of the Earth into the horizon­
tal and vertical components.
Thus, the magnetic field o f the Earth at a given point is completely
characterized by the three quantities: magnetic declination, magnetic dip,
and the value o f the horizontal component o f the magnetic induction.
These three quantities are referred to as the elements of the magnetic field.
is attached to the upper end of the needle, the latter will be arranged at 30° to the
horizontal. What must be the mass of the load attached to the upper end of the needle for
the needle to take a horizontal position?
used for measuring the magnetic dip. It consists of a magnetic needle fixed on a horizon­
tal axle and supplied with a vertical indexing dial for measuring the angles of inclination.
To Exercise 13.2.2.
The needle always rotates in the plane of this dial, while the plane itself can be rotated
about the vertical axis. While measuring the magnetic dip, the dial is arranged in the
plane of magnetic meridian.
Prove that if the dial of the inclinometer is arranged in the magnetic meridian plane,
the needle will form with the horizontal plane an angle equal to the magnetic dip of the
Earth’s field at a given point. How will this angle change if the dial of the inclinometer is
turned about the vertical axis? How will the needle be arranged when the dial plane is
perpendicular to the magnetic meridian plane?
What will be the behaviour of the needle of an inclinometer?
The exact knowledge of the values of the magnetic field elements for as
many points on the Earth as possible is extremely important. It is clear, for
example, that in order to be able to use a magnetic compass, the navigator
of a ship or aeroplane must know the magnetic declination at each point of
its route. Indeed, the magnetic compass indicates the direction of the
Earth’s magnetic meridian, while for plotting the course of the ship the
knowledge of the geographic meridian is required.
The magnetic declination provides the correction to the compass
reading that must be introduced to determine the true north-south direc­
tion. For this reason, a systematic study of the Earth’s magnetic field has
been undertaken in many countries since the middle of the 19th century.
More than 50 special magnetic observatories distributed over the globe
continually provide information about the magnetic condition on the
Earth.
At present, vast data are available on the distribution of elements of the
Earth’s magnetism over the surface of the globe. These data indicate that
the elements of the Earth’s magnetic field vary from point to point accord­
ing to a certain law and are generally determined by the latitude and
longitude of the point under investigation.
Prospecting of Mineral Resources
There are regions on the Earth where the magnetic elements vary abruptly
and assume the values which sharply differ from the corresponding values
in neighbouring localities. Such regions are called the regions of magnetic
anomaly.
In most cases a magnetic anomaly is due to the pressure of a large mass
of magnetic iron ores under the surface of the earth. For this reason, the
study of magnetic anomalies can provide valuable information on the
presence and location of magnetic ore deposits. One of the largest and beststudied in the USSR magnetic anomalies is the Kursk magnetic anomaly in-
Chapter 13
vestigated by a group of Soviet physicists headed by P.P. Lazarev
A detailed analysis of the magnetic field of the Earth is a powerful tool
of investigation of the mineral deposits of the Earth. Magnetometric pros­
pecting is at the present time an important and widely used geophysical
method of exploring mineral resources.
Magnetic Storms
The elements of the Earth’s magnetism at any point on the globe slowly
vary with time. Some European magnetic observatories have the data ac­
cumulated over the last 300-400 years at their disposal. These data give a
clear idea about the law of these slow (or secular) variations of the
magnetic field of the Earth.
However, in addition to secular variation of the Earth’s magnetic field,
the elements of the Earth’s magnetism undergo slight periodic variations
over a day and over a year. These variations are referred to as diurnal and
annual changes in the magnetic field elements and are usually small.
All these periodic changes in the magnetic field occur rather smoothly.
Sometimes, however, the magnetic field of the Earth changes abruptly dur­
ing several hours, this change being significant. This phenomenon is
known as magnetic storm, or magnetic perturbation. A magnetic storm
magnetism gradually acquire their standard values. During equinoxes,
magnetic storms are observed more frequently than during other periods of
the year.
The number and intensity of magnetic storms varies from year to year.
The periods of magnetic storm peaks are repeated with an interval of 11.5
years. After each peak, the number of magnetic storms gradually
decreases, attains its minimum value and then increases again to a peak
value. A number of other phenomena (aurora borealis, sun-spots, some
phenomena associated with the propagation of radio waves, etc.) also have
a period of 11.5 years. It can be stated now that these coincidences are not
accidental but rather point to intrinsic relation between these phenomena
Forces Acting on Current-Carrying
Conductors
in a Magnetic Field
In the previous chapters, we described electromagnetic phenomena.
Various cases of interactions between magnets, effects of currents on
magnets and magnets on currents as well as interactions between currents
were considered. In all these cases, we deal with the action of a magnetic
field produced by magnets or currents on magnets or currents introduced
into the Held. However, the magnetic properties of permanent magnets are
also due to currents continuously circulating in the particles constituting
the magnetic material (Ampere’s molecular currents). Thus, all magnetic
interactions are based on the effect of a magnetic field on currents. For this
reason, a more detailed analysis of this question is of considerable scien­
tific interest. A large number of technical applications of electromagnetic
phenomena is also reduced to the action of a magnetic field on currentcarrying conductors. Therefore, this chapter will be devoted to a more
detailed analysis of the forces acting on current-carrying conductors in a
magnetic Held.
Conductor. Left-Hand Rule
A conductor can be shaped in such a way that the action of the magnetic
Held on various parts of a circuit with current can be revealed most clearly.
We shall use the magnetic Held of a horseshoe magnet or electromagnet,
and the circuit will be connected so that only one straight segment is in a
strong magnetie field, while other parts of the circuit lie in the space where
the field strength is extremely small, and the action of the Held on these
parts can be neglected (Fig. 233). Only the straight conductor ab of the cir­
cuit experiences a noticeable action of Held so that the observed forces are
virtually the forces exerted by the magnetic Held on the straight conductor.
By reversing the direction of current in conductor ab (say, with the help of
a switch) and the direction of the magnetic Held (for example, by turning
Chapter 14
the magnet through 180°), we can investigate the direction of the acting
force (Fig. 234).1These experiments show that conductor ah is deflected to
Action of a magnetic field on a straight current-carrying conductor. Force F pulls the currentcarrying conductor ab out of the field.
the right or to the left (Fig. 233), or tends to move upwards or downwards
conductor when the current in it is parallel to the direction of the field
clusion.
The direction o f the force F exerted by a magnetic field on a straight
conductor with current I is always at right angles to the conductor and to
the direction o f the magnetic induction B. The field exerts no action on
conductors arranged along the magnetic field lines.
In this case, the current /, the magnetic induction B and the force F are
directed as shown in Fig. 235. To memorize this mutual arrangement of
vectors, it is convenient to use the left-hand rule (Fig. 236).
I f the palm o f the left hand is arranged so that the four stretchedfingers
indicate the direction o f current and the magnetic field lines pierce the
palm, the outstretched thumb will indicate the direction o f the force acting
on the conductor.
springs (spring balance) which are stretched or compressed depending on whether the force
acts in the upward or downward direction. In order to make the set-up more sensitive, the
conductor ab should be suspended to the beam of a sensitive beam balance and a strong
magnetic field and a large current should be applied.
The direction of force F changes upon a reversal of the current: the current-carrying conduclor which was (a) pushed out of the magnetic field is now (b) pulled into it. If the direction of
lhe current is parallel to the magnetic field lines (c) the field does not act on the currentcarrying conductor.
Different cases of the mutual arrangement of magnetic induction B and current /. F is the
force acting on the current-carrying conductor.
If the direction of the magnetic induction B forms an angle with the
direction of current /, the magnetic induction should be decomposed into
two components: BNparallel to the current and B± perpendicular to it
by the field, and the left-hand rule should be applied to the perpendicular
component.
If we measure the magnitude of force F with the help of a beam balance
or a spring balance (Fig. 234a and b), it will be found that this force is pro­
portional to the current, the magnetic induction and the length o f conduc-
Chapter 14
D irection of c u rre n t
The left-hand rule.
Decomposition of magnetic induction B into two components.
B, is parallel to the current and B ± is perpendicular to the cur­
rent.
tor ab.2 This relation is known as A m pire’s law. Naturally, such ex­
periments can be used only for a rough verification of the law. However,
using this law for calculating forces acting on complex-shape conductors in
various cases and comparing the results of calculations with experiment,
we can prove the validity of this law.
If the magnetic induction is B, the current is /, the length of a straight
current-carrying conductor is /, and the angle between the vector B and the
conductor is <p. Ampere’s law can be written in the form
F = BIl sin <f>.
This formula shows that when the conductor is parallel to the magnetic in­
duction B (i.e. <p = 0), F = 0. In other words, the field does not act on con­
ductors parallel to the direction of the Held just as it was established from
the experiments described in this section (Fig. 234c).
It was mentioned earlier that two straight parallel conductors attract
each other if the currents in them are parallel and repel each other if the
currents are antiparallel (see Sec. 10.4). This can easily be explained if we
take into account the fact that each conductor is in the magnetic field pro­
duced by the current in the other conductor, and make use of the righthand screw rule and the left-hand rule.
As to the force of attraction (repulsion), it is proportional to the prod­
uct of the currents /, and I2 in the first and second conductors and to the
length / of the conductors, and is inversely proportional to the separation r
between them:
c - H l\h l
conductor ab.
where n0 is the magnetic constant [see formula (12.3.2)]. This is so because
the magnetic induction Bx due to current /, at a distance r from the first
conductor is proportional to f /r , while the force acting on the second con­
ductor (of length I), in accordance with formula (14.2.1), is proportional to
BxI2l. In this case, angle <pis equal to 90°, i.e. sin <p = 1. It can easily be
seen that the force of the same magnitude acts on the first conductor in the
magnetic field of the second conductor carrying the current J2.
For comparing currents and establishing the unit of current it is
generally possible to use any of various effects (manifestations) of electric
current: thermal (Sec. 4.2), chemical (Sec. 5.1) or magnetic (Chap. 12).
The SI unit of current, viz. ampere (one of the base units in this
system), is determined with the help of the forces of interaction between
current-carrying conductors. For this purpose, formula (14.2.2) is used,
which expresses the force of interaction between two parallel currents: an
ampere is a constant current that i f maintained in two straight parallel con­
ductors o f infinite length, o f negligible circular cross section, and placed
one metre apart in vacuum, would produce between these conductors a
force o f 2 • 10“ 7 newton per metre o f length.
It is fairly difficult in practice to create the conditions for formula
ditions. For this reason, another method involving an instrument called the
ampere-balance is used for establishing a standard ampere and calibrating
other instruments for measuring current. In this instrument, the force of
interaction between two coils with the same current is measured with the
help of a very accurate balance. Under these conditions, an exact formula
similar to (14.2.2) and relating the force of attraction between the coils and
the current in them can also be derived.
•) To Exercise 14.2.1
M1—M ing mercury and connected to the poles of a battery. Thus, a current continuously passes
through the conductor in the direction of arrow I {. Conductor cd with the current in the
direction of arrow I2 is arranged in the horizontal plane. How will conductor ab arrange
itself under the action of the magnetic field produced by the current in conductor cdl
arranged in the plane of the magnetic meridian, and the current passes from North to
South; (6) the conductor is perpendicular to the plane of magnetic meridian and the cur­
rent flows in the west-east direction?
In the previous section, we considered the action of a magnetic field on an
artificially isolated straight segment of a current-carrying conductor. But
the conductor is a part of a closed circuit, and the action of the magnetic
field on the current depends in a complicated way on the shape of the con­
ductors and their arrangement relative to the field. We shall limit ourselves
to the analysis of comparatively simple but important cases of a conductor
in the form of a loop or a combination of series-connected turns (a
solenoid). In order to investigate the effect of a magnetic field on such a
loop or a solenoid, it is convenient to choose the conductors of the shape
shown in Fig. 239, where the wires ab and cd supplying the current from a
cjp dp a c * c b d battery are made long and thin so that they simultaneously serve as
suspenders permitting free rotations and displacements of the loop. Plac­
ing such a loop or a solenoid in a magnetic Held (say, the magnetic field of
the Earth or between the poles of a magnet or electromagnet), we can
analyze the effect of the field on the loop (solenoid). Here we can neglect
the action of the field on the leads if they are spaced very closely or, which
is still better, are wound on each other. Indeed, the same current flows
through these wires in the opposite directions and they are in the same
magnetic field. Consequently (see Sec. 14.2), equal and opposite forces act
on the leads so that the suspender remains at rest.
More than once we paid attention to the fact that a current loop is
equivalent to a short magnet arranged perpendicularly to the plane of the
loop so that its north pole is on the side of the loop from which the current
is seen circulating counterclockwise (the right-hand screw rule, Sec. 12.1;
see also Sec. 11.2). A solenoid is equivalent to a magnet arranged along the
solenoid axis. The axis of this magnet coincides with the axis of the
solenoid, and the location of the north and south poles is determined by the
right-hand screw rule, like in the case of a loop. Naturally, the magnetic
field acts on such a loop or solenoid as on a magnetic needle. Namely, a
uniform field produces a torque which tends to rotate the loop or solenoid
so that its axis becomes oriented along the field, and the direction from the
south to the north pole of the loop (solenoid) coincides with the direction
of the field (Fig. 240). In a nonuniform field, this torque is supplemented
The arrangement of (a) a current loop and (b) a solenoid in the magnetic field.
by a force which drives the turned loop (solenoid) in the direction of in­
creasing magnetic induction.
Using the data from Sec. 14.2 on the action of a magnetic field on a
straight current-carrying conductor, we can get a clearer idea about the
origin of the torque and the driving force which act on the current loop in
the magnetic field. Let the loop have a rectangular shape (Fig. 241) and be
arranged in a uniform Held so that its two sides are parallel to the field and
the other two sides are perpendicular to it. The field exerts no action on the
first two sides (Fig. 234c), while the other two sides are acted upon by two
equal and opposite forces F, and F2 since these sides have the same length /
and carry the same current I ’m the opposite directions (Fig. 241). Thus, the
<bl A current loop (frame) in a uniform magnetic field is arranged so that its plane is perpen­
dicular to the field lines: (a) side view; (b) top view.
forces exerted by the uniform field on the current loop form a couple which
produces the torque rotating the loop so that its plane is arranged perpen­
dicularly to the direction of the field.
If the field is uniform, the effect of the field is reduced to this rotation
since the four forces F ,, F2, and F3, F4 have different directions and are
unable to move the loop but only tend to deform it. They are balanced by
elastic forces emerging during the deformation of the rigid loop (Fig. 242).
f. A frame with current is arranged perpendicularly to the magnetic field lines of a uniform
field. The forces acting on the frame tend to deform it (compress of extend) without causing
its translatory motion as a whole: (a) side view (the magnetic field is directed to the observer);
If, however, the field is nonuniform, and hence the magnetic induction has
different directions (and magnitudes) at different points, the result will be
cause its motion towards the region of maximum magnetic induction. (<b) Composition of
forces Fj and F2 acting on the sides of the frame. The resultant F tends to pull the frame into
the region with maximum magnetic induction.
more complicated (Fig. 243). The forces acting on the sides of the loop
turned by the Held are no longer equal and opposite but form angles with
each other (Fig. 243a), since they are perpendicular to the magnetic induc­
tion of the field. Their resultant F points towards the increasing magnetic
induction (Fig. 243b).3
So far we have considered only rectangular loops. However, all what
has been said above remains in force for any shape of the loop. Naturally,
the analysis for an arbitrary shape becomes more complicated and is not
presented here.
The above line of reasoning is also applicable to any turn of a solenoid.
The torques acting on each turn of a rigid solenoid are composed to give
the resultant torque rotating the solenoid as a whole. In a nonuniform
field, the forces pulling each turn towards the increasing magnetic induc­
tion will exert the same action on the entire solenoid. This argument ex­
plains, in particular, why a magnetic needle is rotated and driven along a
elementary current.
magnetic induction is larger (see Sec. 11.5).
Chapter 14
To Exercise 14.3.4.
posite direction? What shape does the loop tend to acquire in both cases if it is made ot a
very flexible wire?
the spiral is compressed along the axis. Explain this phenomenon.
supplied to the spring through the upper fixed end 1 and a bowl with mercury 2 in which
the lower end of the spring is immersed. When the current is switched on, the spring is
periodically compressed and stretched, its lower end now rising from the mercury and
then entering it again. What device resembling this set-up do you know? For what pur­
pose can it be used?
on irrespective of the current direction. This phenomenon is used in the construction of
ammeters and voltmeters of the electromagnetic system employed for measuring alter­
a scale). Explain this experiment. Would the piece of iron be set in motion if it were
placed inside the coil, i.e. the region where the magnetic field is uniform?
To Exercise 14.3.5.
the horizontal position and wound on a copper or glass tube. An iron “projectile” (nail)
time, the projectile is pulled into the tube, passes through it and flies out at a con­
siderable velocity. At what moment should the current be switched off for the projectile
to leave the solenoid at a maximum velocity? What will be the motion of the nail if the
current is switched on all the time?
Since the forces exerted on a current in a magnetic Held are proportional to
the current, this effect is convenient for measuring currents, i.e. for con­
structing measuring instruments known as galvanometers. The most
typical construction is that with a rotating coil (frame). The schematic
diagram of such a galvanometer is shown in Fig. 248. A light flat coil
rotates in ball bearings and is maintained in the equilibrium position with
Chapter 14
Schematic diagram of a galvanometer with a rotating coil; I _
a freely suspended coil consisting of a large number of turns of
thin insulated wire, 2 — magnet.
the help of elastic springs (like the hair spring of a wrist watch). Current is
supplied through the suspenders or very flexible strips made of a soft metal
the absence of current the elastic fixture ensures the arrangement of the coil
along the magnetic field. When the current is switched on, the magnetic
field turns the coil until the torque produced by the field is balanced by the
torque of the twisted suspender or elastic springs. Having graduated the in­
strument beforehand, i.e. having determined the angles of rotation cor­
responding to different currents, we can judge about the current in the coil
from the angle of its rotation. The readings are taken from the scale accor­
ding to the position of the pointer fixed to the coil or, in more sensitive in­
struments, with the help of a movable light spot formed on a distant scale
by a light mirror fixed to the frame.
The sensitivity of this type of galvanometer can be made very high (up
to 10~9 and even 10“ 10 A per scale division). Very sensitive galvanometers
can also be constructed on the principle illustrated in Fig. 234. Conductor
ab is then taken in the form of a very thin and light wire kept in the
magnetic field by elastic suspenders. When a current is passed through the
wire, it is slightly displaced under the action of the force F. The displace­
ment of the wire (which depends on the current) is measured with the help
of a low-power microscope (string galvanometer).
It was shown in Sec. 12.4 that the magnetic fie ld o f an electric current
should be considered as the fie ld produced by moving charges. This impor­
tant idea was put forth by the Dutch physicist H. Lorentz (1853-1928) and
confirmed in the experiments carried out by A. Eichenwald, W. Roentgen
and others. Lorentz was also the author of the inverse statement: the forces
exerted by a magnetic fie ld on a current-carrying conductor are the forces
acting on m oving charges (electrons and ions) constituting the current.
These forces are referred to as Lorents forces. But since moving charges
collide with atoms of a substance, the forces exerted by the magnetic field
on moving charges entrain the conductor in which these charges move, i.e.
through which the current passes. Thus, the forces o f interaction between a
current and a magnetic fie ld considered in the previous sections are reduced
to L orentz forces. The existence of these forces is manifested most clearly
in the experiments on deflection of an electron beam in a magnetic field,
considered in Sec. 8.13. These experiments show that the Lorentz fo rce
acting on an electron e moving in a magnetic fie ld is normal to the electron
velocity v and to the magnetic induction B (Fig. 249). The direction of this
An electron in a magnetic field.
force can be determined from the left-hand rule (see Sec. 14.2; is should
only be borne in mind that the direction of motion of electrons is opposite
to the direction of electric current since electrons bear negative charges; for
this reason, the fingers of the left hand showing the direction of current
must be stretched against the direction of electron motion).
The magnitude of the Lorentz force 4 is determined by the formula [cf.
F = evB sin a,
where e is the electron charge and a is the angle between vectors v and B
Lorents force. The “total" Lorentz force includes, in addition, an electric component equal to
eE, where E is the electric field strength. — Eds.
Chapter 14
field stronger? It is assumed that the field is extended and the electrons within its bound­
aries can be considered.
field: (a) for positive and negative ions; (b) for singly charged ions, doubly charged ions,
and so on; (c) for ions with a large and small molecular mass?
field with induction B and is deflected by the Lorentz force. What will be the trajectory
of electrons? Will the magnitude of the electron velocity change in this case?
incident on the screen and causing its glowing is deflected from the straight path by a
magnetic field. If the beam is emitted4n the horizontal direction and the magnetic field is
directed vertically downwards, what will be the deflection of the electron beam? How
will positive and negative ions of a gas present in an insufficiently evacuated tube be
deflected?
to which a magnet is brought. Verify the correctness of this figure with the help of the
left-hand rule.
In experiments with cathode rays, electrons move in vacuum, and hence
their deflection by a magnetic field is a direct and visual result of the action
of the Lorentz forces. However, in the case of currents in conductors
to the interaction of moving ions and electrons with the atoms and
molecules of the conductor. The existence of this interaction (a sort of fric­
tion between charged and uncharged particles) can easily be revealed and
demonstrated in a number of simple experiments.
Ions moving along the radii of the vessel (positive ions move from anode 1 to cathode 2, while
the particles of the liquid. The float with a flag starts moving in a circle.
electrodes, viz. ring 1 and rod 2, are connected to the poles of a battery.
The current in the electrolyte passes from 1 to 2, i.e. the ions move along
the radii of the vessel. We place the vessel on a pole of a magnet (say, the
angles to the direction of the motion of ions. The Lorentz forces tend to
displace ions along the arrow in the horizontal plane in circles perpen­
dicularly to the radii of the vessel. It will be seen that the solution will move
as a whole in this direction, which is manifested in the motion of a float
with a flag. If the direction of the current in the electrolyte or the direction
of the magnetic field is reversed, the direction of motion of the float will
also be reversed.
In order to explain this experiment, it should be recalled that ions con­
stitute only a small fraction of the total number of molecules in a solution.
Only moving ions experience the action of the Lorentz forces, while the en­
tire mass of neutral molecules of the liquid is set in circular motion due to
collisions of ions with neutral molecules. Consequently, this experiment
proves not only the existence of forces exerted by a magnetic field on mov­
ing ions but also the presence of “friction” between the ions and the
molecules of the liquid.
A similar experiment revealing “friction” between electrons and atoms
of a metal can be carried out by pouring mercury instead of electrolyte into
the vessel shown in Fig. 250.
An experiment illustrating “friction” between electrons and atoms of a
solid metal is depicted in Fig. 251. A copper disc 1 whose edge is immersed
in a groove with mercury 3 which serves for supplying current from a bat­
tery to the edge of the disc, can rotate between the poles of a horse-shoe
magnet 2. The other pole of the battery is connected to the axle of the disc.
When the switch is closed, the disc starts to rotate. If we reverse the direc­
tion of the current or of the magnetic field, the direction of rotation is
reversed as well. This phenomenon can be explained in the same way as the
experiments described above. When the current is passed, the electrons
move along the radius connecting the centre of the disc with the point of
contact between the disc and mercury. The Lorentz forces try to deflect the
electrons in the perpendicular direction. As a result of “friction” between
electrons and the atoms of the metal, the entire disc begins to rotate. The
direction of rotation can be determined with the help of the left-hand rule.
It is appropriate here to consider again the experiments on the nature of electric current in
metals (see Sec. 7.1), in which the interaction between the particles of a metal and the free
electrons in it was discovered. In a certain respect, these experiments are inverse to those
described in this section. In Sec. 7.1, it was revealed that electrons were entrained when a
Chapter 14
Electrons moving along the radii of disc 1 are deflected by the magnetic field of horse-shoe
magnet 2 and set the disc in rotation.
substance moved as a whole, while in this section the substance is dragged by the motion of
electrons. In both cases, experiments point to the existence of “friction” between electrons
and the substance, which allows us to explain the effect of the magnetic field on currentcarrying conductors caused by the Lorentz forces.
All the experiments described above provide an irrefutable qualitative
proof of the correctness of the Lorentz hypothesis. But Lorentz himself
went a step further. After a thorough analysis of the laws determining the
forces acting on individual charged particles, he showed that all forces ex­
erted by a magnetic field on current-carrying conductors can be explained
field on individual particles whose motion in the conductor constitutes the
current.
Taking into account the Lorentz forces, we arrive at extremely impor­
tant conclusions. For example, by measuring the deviation of electrons in a
magnetic field under the action of the Lorentz forces and their deflection in
an electric field, it is possible to determine an important characteristic of
the electron, viz. the ratio of its electric charge e to mass m. It turns out
that irrespective of the way of obtaining the flow of free electrons (by emis­
sion from incandescent bodies, see Sec. 7.5, as a result of photoelectric ef­
fect, see Sec. 1.9, or by knocking electrons by ion impacts, see Sec. 8.11),
the obtained electrons are characterized by the same value of the ratio e /m .
Thus, these measurements prove that the particles (electrons) released in
these experiments are of the same nature.
The ratio of the charge of the electron to its mass is
— = 1.76 x 10" C/kg.
The electron charge can also be measured by different methods. All of
them give the following value for the electron charge:
e = 1.60 x 10-,9 C.
Thus, the mass of an electron is
m = 0.91 x 10-30 kg.
In order to visualize the smallness of the electron mass, it can be
pointed out that it is approximately in the same proportion to 1 g as 1 g is
to the mass of the Earth.
It is interesting to compare the obtained value of the electron mass with
the mass of the atom of the lightest substance, viz. hydrogen. A mole of
hydrogen, i.e. 0.002016 kg, contains 6.02 x 1023 molecules (Avogadro’s
= 3.35 x 10-27 kg.
But a hydrogen molecule H2 consists of two atoms. Therefore, the mass of
a hydrogen atom is equal to half this value, i.e. 1.67 x 10-27 kg. Thus, the
electron mass constitutes about 1/2000 (to be more precise, 1/1836) of the
mass of the atom of the lightest substance (hydrogen).
The Lorentz force which causes the deflection of electrons in magnetic Helds from their initial
trajectory is manifested in many natural phenomena which can be explained only with the
help of these forces. The most spectacular and magnificent phenomenon of this kind is aurora
borealis (australis), which is typical of high latitudes, near the North (South) Polar circle. A
strikingly beautiful phenomenon can be observed in the sky during a long polar night: the sky
starts to glow, showing patterns of various colours and forms. Sometimes it has the form of a
uniform arc, stationary or pulsating, and sometimes it consists of a large number of rays of
different length, which play and wind like bands or curtains, and so on (Fig. 252). The colours
of the glow vary from yellowish-green to red and greyish-violet.
The nature and origin of aurorae polares remained completely mysterious for a long
time. It was quite recently that this enigma received a satisfactory explanation.
Chapter 14
Aurora borealis (one of the forms).
First of all, the scientists succeeded in determining the altitude at which aurorae polares
emerge. For this purpose, the same glow was photographed from two points a few tens of
kilometres apart. With the help of such photographs it was established that aurorae polares
appear at an altitude of 80 to 1000 km above the ground (most often at an altitude of
Earth’s atmosphere, which to a certain extent is similar to the glow in gas-discharge tubes
An interesting relation between aurorae polares and other phenomena has been
elucidated. Aurorae polares are observed in varying periods. In some years, they are more fre­
quent than in others. Many years’ observations revealed that the periods of maximum fre­
quency of aurorae polares are repeated regularly in 11.5 years. During this time, the number
of aurorae polares first decreases from year to year and then starts to increase to attain a max­
imum value again in 11.5 years.
The observation of the surface of the Sun revealed long ago dark irregular spots on its
disc, which often change their shape and position. It turned out that the number and the total
area of these spots vary from year to year not at random but with the same period of 11.5
years. In this process, the maxima of solar spots, or the maxima of solar activity, are attained
simultaneously with the maxima of aurorae polares, their attenuations being also matched.
The number of magnetic storms (see Sec. 13.4) varies according to the same law, attaining the
maximum value in the periods of maximum solar activity. In recent years, a similar relation­
ship was established for certain between the solar activity (number of spots) and the condi­
tions of propagation of radio waves in the upper layers of the atmosphere. Thus, in addition
to purely theoretical significance, the problem has become of practical importance.
Comparing these facts, the Norwegian scientist O. Birkeland put forth a hypothesis that
solar spots are the regions from which the beams of charged particles (electrons) are emitted
into surrounding space. Reaching the upper layers of the Earth’s atmosphere, they induce the
glow of gases in them by electron impacts similar to that in the gas-discharge tube. These elec­
trons also affect the magnetic field of the Earth and the conditions of propagation of radio
waves near the ground.
But if this is so, why are aurorae polares observed only in high latitudes, i.e. in the
regions close to the Earth’s poles? Solar rays are known to illuminate the entire surface of the
Earth. The answer to this question was found by another Norwegian scientist Stermer.
Charged particles emitted by the Sun arrive at the Earth and get into its magnetic field. Here
they are acted upon by the Lorentz force which deflects them from their initially straight
paths. Stermer made complicated mathematical computations and calculated the trajectories
of these electrons in the magnetic field of the Earth. He showed that charged particles
deflected by the magnetic field of the Earth can indeed get only into polar regions of the
globe.
This theory which takes into account the Lorentz force deflecting charged particles that
move in the magnetic field of the Earth, is in good agreement with a large number of ex­
perimental results and is generally accepted at present, although recently a number of dif­
ficulties in quantitative explanation of the entire range of phenomena from this point of view
were revealed.
Electromagnetic Induction
Let us consider again some simple experiments in which electric current
emerges as a result of electromagnetic induction.
One such experiment is shown in Fig. 253. If a coil consisting of a large
dicated by the deflection of the pointer of a galvanometer connected to the
ends of the coil. The same will be observed if a magnet is rapidly inserted
into the coil or pulled out of it (Fig. 2536). Apparently, only relative mo­
tion of the coil and magnetic field is important.
Let us now consider a few more experiments which will allow us to for­
mulate the condition of emergence of induced current in a more general
form.
The first set o f experiments: changing the magnetic induction of a field
containing an inductance coil (or frame).
The coil is placed in a magnetic Held, say, into a solenoid (Fig. 254a) or
between the poles of an electromagnet (Fig. 2546). We arrange the coil so
that the plane of its turns is perpendicular to the magnetic field lines of the
solenoid or electromagnet. We shall vary the magnetic induction of the
field by rapidly changing the current in the winding (with the help of a
rheostat) or just by switching on or off the current (with the help of a
switch). Any change in the magnetic Held causes a sharp deflection of the
pointer of the galvanometer. This points to the emergence of an induced
current in the circuit containing the inductance coil. When the magnetic
field increases (or emerges), a current of a certain direction is induced,
while the attenuation (or vanishing) of the magnetic field induces the cur­
rent in the opposite direction. Let us now make the same experiment by ar­
ranging the coil so that the planes of its turns are parallel1to the magnetic
field lines (Fig. 255). The result of the experiment will be negative: no in­
duced current will be registered irrespective of the change in the magnetic
field.
Naturally, such an experiment can be carried out successfully only if the magnetic field
has the same direction along the coil. The experiment can easily be made in the uniform field
of a long solenoid.
During a relative displacement of the coil and the magnet a current is induced in the coil: (a)
the coil is put on the magnet; (b) the magnet is inserted into the coil.
The second set o f experiments: changing the position of a coil in a con­
stant magnetic Held.
We place the coil into a solenoid where the magnetic field is uniform
and rapidly turn it through a certain angle about the axis perpendicular to
the direction of the field (Fig. 256). With each turn, a galvanometer con­
the initial position of the coil and on the direction of its rotation. When the
coil completes one turn by 360°, the direction of induced current changes
twice (each time the coil passes the position in which its plane is perpen­
dicular to the direction of the magnetic field). Naturally, if we rotate the
Chapter 15
A current is induced in the coil upon a variation of the magnetic induction if the plane of the
turns is perpendicular to the magnetic field lines: (a) the coil in the field of a solenoid; (b) the
coil in the field of an electromagnet. The magnetic induction varies when the key is connected
or disconnected or when the current in the circuit is varied.
i=0 P=0 V.y No current is induced if the plane of the
turns is parallel to the magnetic field
lines.
A current is induced in a coil rotated in
a magnetic field.
coil at a very high speed, the induced current will change its direction so
frequently that the pointer of an ordinary galvanometer will not have time
to follow these variations and another, more sensitive instrument, will be
required for detecting the induced current.
If, however, we move the coil so that it does not rotate about the direc­
tion of the field but is just translated parallel to itself in any direction along
the field, across it or at a certain angle to it, no current will be induced. It
should be emphasized once again that the experiment with a moving coil is
carried out in a uniform field (like the Held in a solenoid or the magnetic
field of the Earth). If the field is nonuniform (for example, near the pole of
a magnet or electromagnet), any displacement of the coil may be accom­
panied by the emergence of induced current with a single exception: no cur­
rent is induced if the coil moves so that its plane remains parallel to the
direction of the field (i.e. no magnetic field lines pass through the coil).
The third set o f experiments: changing the area of a loop in a constant
magnetic field.
Experiment of this type can be made according to the following scheme
between the poles of a large electromagnet). Suppose that initially the loop
had a circular shape (Fig. 257a). The loop can rapidly be contracted by
hand to a narrow oval which embraces a much smaller area (Fig. 2576).
The galvanometer will indicate the emergence of induced current.
A current is induced in the loop placed in a constant magnetic field if the area bounded by the
loop and arranged perpendicularly to the magnetic field lines is changed (the magnetic field is
directed from the observer).
An experiment involving the change in the area of the loop can be made
more illustrative with the help of a set-up schematically shown in Fig. 258.
Loop abed whose one side {be in Fig. 258) is made movable is arranged in a
magnetic field. Any movement of this side causes the induced current
detected by the galvanometer. When be moves to the left (thus increasing
the area of the loop abed), the induced current has one direction, while
when be moves to the right (when the area abed becomes smaller), the in­
duced current is directed oppositely. But in this case too no current is in20—7185
Chapter 15
As rod be is moved, the area of the loop abed placed in the magnetic field B changes, and cur­
rent is induced in the loop.
duced upon a change in the area of the loop if the plane of the loop is
parallel to the direction of the magnetic field.
Comparing all experiments described above, we can formulate the con­
ditions of emergence of induced current in the general form. In all above
cases, we had a loop in a magnetic field, and the plane of the loop could
form a certain angle with the direction of the magnetic induction. We
denote by S the area bounded by the loop, by B the magnetic induction of
the field and by <pthe angle between the magnetic induction and the plane
of the loop. Then the magnetic induction component perpendicular to the
plane of the loop will be given by (Fig. 259)
B ± = B sin ip.
The product B ± S will be called the magnetic flu x 2 through the loop and
denoted by $. Thus,
* = B ± S = B Ssim p.
It has been already mentioned earlier (see Secs. 2.6 and 11.5) that the pattern of
magnetic field lines, like that of electric field lines, can be drawn so that the number of lines
per unit area of the loop is equal in magnitude to the field component normal to the plane of
the loop. Thus, the magnetic flux through the loop can be visually represented as the total
Decomposition of the magnetic induction B into the component
perpendicular to the plane of the induction loop (B ±) and the
component parallel to this plane (Ba).
In all cases considered above, we changed the magnetic flux $ in one
way or another. In some of them, this was done by changing the magnetic
induction B (Fig. 254), in other cases the angle ^ was altered (Fig. 256) or
the area S (Fig. 257). In the general case all the quantities which determine
the magnetic flux through the loop can be varied simultaneously. A
thorough analysis of various experiments on electromagnetic induction
shows that an induced current emerges if and only if the magnetic flux $ is
changed. No current is induced if the magnetic flux $ through a given loop
remains unchanged.
Therefore, any change in the magnetic flu x through a conducting loop
generates an electric current in this loop. This is the essence of a fundamen­
tal law of nature, viz. the law of electromagnetic induction discovered by
M. Faraday in 1831.
Coil II is placed into coil I (Fig. 260). The circuit of coil I contains a battery,
while coil II is connected to a galvanometer. If an iron rod is pulled into or out of the
first coil, the galvanometer will indicate the induced current in the second coil. Explain
this effect.
To Exercise 15.1.1.
magnetic induction. Will a current be induced in the frame?
what direction of motion of the car is this emf maximal? minimal? Does the induced emf
depend on the velocity of the car?
Chapter 15
rent induced in it when the car moves? How can the answer to this problem be matched
with the result of Exercise 15.1.3?
trical measuring instruments at a few metres from the site of the stroke and by melting
fuses in the lighting system?
The experiments described in the previous section reveal that the direction
of induced current can be different: in different situations the pointer of
the galvanometer was deflected to different sides. We shall now try to find
the general rule determining the direction of induced current.
For this purpose, let us analyze the direction of the induced current in
any experiment on electromagnetic induction, say, in the one shown in
Coils I and II are represented by single loops, while the arrows 7pr and Jtad
indicate the directions of the primary current in coil I and induced current
in coil II respectively.
The relation between the direction of the primary current / pr producing the magnetic field and
the direction of the induced current / ind: (a) when the magnetic field increases; 0 ) when the
magnetic field decreases.
while Fig. 261b corresponds to the attenuation of the primary current. It
can be seen that in the former case, i.e. when the magnetic field increases
have opposite directions. On the contrary, when the current is induced as a
result of attenuation of the magnetic Held, i.e. for a decreasing magnetic
flux, the currents 7pr and 7ind have the same direction. In other words, it can
be said that when electromagnetic induction is caused by an increase in the
magnetic flux piercing the loop, the induced current is directed so that it
weakens the initial magnetic flux. Conversely, when electromagnetic induc­
tion is due to an attenuation of the magnetic flux, the magnetic field of the
induced current increases the initial magnetic flux.
The result obtained by us can be formulated in the form of the follow­
ing general rule.
A n induced current is always directed so that its magnetic field
decreases {compensatesfo r) the change in the magneticflu x that has caused
this current.
This general rule is observed in all cases of electromagnetic induction
without any exception. Let us consider, for example, the case when elec­
tromagnetic induction is caused by a displacement of a loop or its part
relative to the magnetic Held. This experiment is shown in Fig. 253, and its
schematic diagram is given in Fig. 262. The arrows on the loop indicate the
Rg. 262.
The direction of current induced in a loop when (0 ) a magnet
approaches it; (ft) a magnet is removed from it.
direction of the current induced in the coil as it approaches the north pole
TVof a magnet (Fig. 262a) or as it moves away from it (Fig. 262b). Using
the right-hand screw rule (Sec. 12.1), we can easily determine the direction
of the magnetic field generated by the induced current and make sure that
it corresponds to the rule formulated above.
Let us now pay attention to the following fact. When a current is in­
duced in the coil, the latter becomes equivalent to a magnet whose north
and south poles can be distinguished with the help of the right-hand screw
rule. In Fig. 262a the north pole emerges on the upper end of the coil, while
in Fig. 262b there appears the south pole. Thus, when we bring, say, the
its end closer to the magnet. When the north pole TVof the magnet is moved
away from the coil, the south pole appears at its end facing the magnet. But
it is well known that magnets facing each other with like poles repel and
those facing each other with unlike poles attract each other. Therefore,
when induction is caused by bringing the magnet closer to the coil, the
Chapter 15
forces of interaction between the magnet and induced current repel the
magnet from the coil. On the other hand, when electromagnetic induction
is associated with drawing the magnet away from the coil, the coil and the
magnet attract each other. Thus, when induction occurs as a result of mo­
tion of a magnet or inductance coil as a whole, the following rule can be
formulated, which is essentially equivalent to the rule formulated above,
but is more convenient for the latter cases.
Induced current has such a direction that its interaction with the
primary magnetic field opposes the motion causing the induction.
This rule is known as Lenz’s law.3
Lenz’s law is closely related to the energy conservation law. Indeed, let us suppose, for
example, that the current induced in a solenoid approached by the north pole N of a magnet
has the direction opposite to that determined by the Lenz’s law, i.e. not the north but the
south pole emerges at the end of the solenoid closest to the magnet. In this case, the forces of
attraction and not repulsion act between the solenoid and the magnet. The magnet continues
to approach the solenoid with an ever larger velocity, creating in it stronger and stronger cur­
rents, and thus increasing all the time the force of attraction to the solenoid. Thus, without
spending any external work, we obtain, on the one hand, a continuous accelerated motion of
the magnet to the solenoid, and on the other hand, an ever increasing current in the solenoid,
which would be capable of doing work. Obviously, it is impossible, and the induced current
cannot have a direction other than that determined by Lenz’s law. This can also be verified by
analyzing other cases of induction.
Inductance coil in the form of a ring is suspended between the poles of a magnet. If the
magnet is moved away from the ring, the ring follows the magnet. If the magnet is moved to
the ring, the latter moves away from the magnet.
In the most general form, Lenz’s law states that the induced current always has such a
direction as to oppose its cause. — Eds.
Lenz’s law. An aluminium ring playing the role of an inductance coil is
suspended in the vicinity of a strong magnet or electromagnet which can be
moved along a rail. Moving the magnet away from the ring, we see that the
ring follows the magnet. Conversely, bringing the magnet closer to the
ring, we see that the ring moves away from the magnet. In both cases, the
motion of the magnet causes the change in the magnetic flux through the
ring, and a current is induced in the ring. According to Lenz’s law, this cur­
rent is directed so that its interaction with the moving magnet hampers the
motion of the magnet. By Newton’s third law (see Vol. 1), the reaction
force is applied to the ring and causes its displacement.
Rotation of magnet I produces a rotating magnetic field
which sets ring 2 in rotation.
replaced by rotation. As magnet 1 rotates, its magnetic field, which re­
mains constant in magnitude, rotates together with it. As a result, the
magnetic flux through ring 2 varies all the time, and a current is induced in
the ring. Applying Lenz’s law and taking into account Newton’s third law,
we draw the conclusion that the ring placed in the rotating magnetic field
starts to rotate in the same direction as the magnetic field does.
This experiment is very important since it explains the operating princi­
ple of one of the most wide-spread types of electric motor.
Two long conductors a and b are arranged in parallel at a small distance from
each other (Fig. 265). The first conductor is connected to a current source, and the sec­
ond one is connected to a galvanometer. If the current in the first conductor is varied in
one way or another (say, with the help of a rheostat), the galvanometer will indicate an
Chapter 15
To Exercise 15.2.1.
induced current in the second conductor. Explain this experiment. What is the shape of
magnetic field lines in this case? What can be treated as an inductance coil? What is the
direction of the induced current when the primary current is being increased (decreased)?
current in the experiment shown in Fig. 258, assuming that the magnetic field is directed
vertically upwards and the conductor moves from left to right. What will be the change
in the direction of the induced current if the direction of the magnetic field or the direc­
tion of motion of the conductor is reversed? Formulate an analogous “right-hand rule”
for the current in conductor be.
schematic diagram shown in Fig. 260. The signs of the battery poles are indicated on the
figure. Determine the direction of current in coil II when the iron rod is drawn into or out
of coil I.
The basic law of electromagnetic induction states that any change in the
magnetic flux piercing the surface embraced by a conducting loop induces
a current in the loop. However, by varying in exactly the same way the
magnetic flux through loops made of different materials but similar in all
other respects, we shall see that different currents are induced in them. Let
us make, for example, two coils of the same shape and size and having the
same number of turns, but one made of a copper wire and the other of a
magnetic field (say, into a long solenoid) and orient them identically
relative to the direction of the field. Switching off the magnetic field, we
shall observe induced currents in the coils but the current in the copper coil
will be 70 times as strong as the current in the nichrome coil. Carrying out
various experiments of this kind, we shall see that other conditions being
equal, the induced current is the stronger the lower the electric resistance o f
the coil.4.
It is assumed that while measuring current, we can neglect the resistance of the measuring instrument in comparison with the resistance of the coil.
fig .
As the resistance of the induction circuit increases, the induced current decreases (the lamp
glows not so brightly). I — coil carrying the primary current, II — coil with induced current.
This circumstance leads us to the conclusion that under given ex­
perimental conditions a certain emf is induced in the coil, and the current
induced as a result is determined by Ohm’s law and therefore turns out to
be inversely proportional to the electric resistance of the circuit.
Indeed, a simple experiment can be made to show that Ohm’s law is
valid fo r induced currents. Let us connect the ends of a coil in which a cur­
rent is induced to a circuit whose resistance can be varied and perform ap­
propriate measurements. For example, we connect coil I (Fig. 266) to the
alternating current of the lighting system which is known to change its
direction 100 times per second (and hence 100 times per second drops to
zero and attains its maximum value). Since the current in coil I, and hence
its magnetic field, continually change, an alternating emf will be induced in
coil II, whose direction will also vary all the time. We connect in series an
incandescent lamp as a current indicator and a rheostat in the circuit of the
inductance coil II. An induced current of alternating magnitude and direc­
tion will pass through the filament of the lamp, heat it and can make it
glow brightly. Without changing the coils and their mutual arrangement,
let us increase the resistance of the induction circuit two or threee times by
moving the slider of the rheostat. It will be seen that the glow of the lamp
will become much weaker (reddish), which points to a decrease in the cur­
rent passing through it.
Having replaced the lamp by a hot-wire ammeter (see Sec. 3.6), we can
measure the magnitude of the induced current. If we measure besides the
total resistance of the entire circuit, we can make sure that Ohm’s law (see
Sec. 3.8) is valid for induced currents:
where / is the current, R is the total resistance of the circuit, i.e. the sum of
the resistances of the inductance coil and other elements of the circuit
Chapter 15
remains unchanged when we vary the resistance of the circuit in these ex­
periments.
The concept of emf was encountered when we considered the condition
of emergence and maintaining of electric current in a circuit (see Sec. 3.1).
An essential difference between the cases considered earlier (in Chap. 6)
and induced emf lies in the following. For a galvanic cell, accumulator or
thermocouple, it could be established that an emf emerges in a certain part
of the circuit (i.e. at the interface between a metal and an electrolyte or at
the contact between two different metals). In the case of electromagnetic
induction, the emf is not concentrated in a certain part of the circuit but
acts in the entire induction circuit, i.e. at each point of the circuit where the
magnetic flux changes.
In the case of a loop embracing the magnetic field lines, an emf is in­
duced at all points of the loop and can be calculated for the loop as a
whole. If we have several loops (turns), the same takes place in each of
them: the em f o f a coil is the sum o f em f's o f individual turns.
Thus, we have established that in the process of electromagnetic induction
an emf is induced, owing to which a current emerges in conductors. The
magnitude of this current is determined by Ohm’s law in terms of the in­
duced emf and the resistance of the circuit. What does the induced emf de­
pend on?
If we analyze all experiments on electromagnetic induction (see
Sec. 14.6), it can easily be seen that the magnitude of the current induced in
a circuit, and hence the induced emf, turn out to be different depending on
the rate of variation of the magnetic flux, which is the necessary condition
for the emergence of induction. The slower the variation of the magnetic
flux, the smaller the induced emf and the weaker the current induced for a
given resistance of the circuit. Thus, varying the magnetic flux by a certain
value in different periods of time, we obtain different values of induced
emf. If by the moment of time f, the magnetic flux had the value 4>, and by
the moment t2 its value has become $2, then during the time A t = t2 — t,
the magnetic flux has changed by A$ = $2 — . The ratio A$/At gives
the change in the magnetic flux per unit time, i.e. it is the rate o f variation
o f the magnetic flu x. Measurements made in various experiments (in dif­
ferent circuits for different values of magnetic flux, and so on) show that
the induced emf is completely determined by the rate of variation of the
magnetic flux.
Thus, the induced em f «^nd is proportional to the rate o f variation o f the
Electromagnetic Induction
magnetic flu x through the surface bounded by the loop. In SI, the propor­
tionality factor is equal to unity, so that
It goes without saying that if the magnetic flux changes nonuniformly
with time, the ratio A$/At gives the average rate of variation of the
magnetic flux, which is similar to the average velocity of motion (see
Vol. 1). Accordingly, formula (15.4.1) allows us to calculate the average
induced emf. In order to determine the instantaneous value of the induced
emf at every instant of time, we must (like while determining the velocity of
small time interval A t for which the variation of the magnetic flux can be
considered uniform for our methods of measurement. In these cases, the
ratio A$/A t will characterize the rate of variation of the magnetic flux for
a given instant of time, and the value of A i/A t calculated by formula
reasoning is exactly the same as that used in mechanics for determining the
instantaneous and average velocities.
In our arguments, we assumed that we deal with a loop consisting of a
single turn, i.e. with the loop which embraces the field lines only once. In
the general case, when an inductance coil has N identical turns with a
magnetic flux changing by A$ through each of them, the induced emf will
obviously be N times larger since the turns of the coil are connected in
series, and the em fs induced in individual turns are added. Thus, the em f
induced in a coil consisting o f N turns is proportional to the number o f
turns and to the rate o f variation o f the magnetic flu x through each turn o f
the coil:
If the turns are not identical so that the changes in the magnetic flux through these turns
areA * ,,A * 2, A *j........the sum A$, + A*2 + A*} + ...is the total change in the flux pierc­
ing all the turns of the coil, i.e. the change in the flux through the coil as a whole. The emf in­
duced in such a coil is
<£ 1 + 4nd 2 + “^nd 3
"^nd —
~ ^nd
where
= A4»j + A$2 +
+ . At At At At * Chapter 15
Formulas (15.4.1) and (15.4.2) give the values of induced emf. As to the
direction of induced emf (direction of induced current), it is determined by
the Lenz’s law (see Sec. 15.2).
The SI unit of magnetic flux is the weber (Wb) after the German
physicist W.E. Weber (1804-1891). The weber is the magnetic flu x through
a surface o f an area o f one square metre, which is pierced by the magnetic
lines o f a uniform field with the magnetic induction o f one tesla, the field
lines being perpendicular to the surface. An emf of 1 V is induced in the
loop with a change in magnetic flux of 1 Wb/s.
vertical diameter. When such a coil rotates in the magnetic field of the Earth, an electric
current is induced in it. Consider the following three cases: (a) the inductor rotates about
the vertical axis OO; (b) the rotation axis is horizontal and is directed along the magnetic
meridian (from North to South), and (c) the rotation axis is horizontal and is directed
perpendicularly to the magnetic meridian (from West to East). Which component of the
magnetic field of the Earth induces current in each of these cases? In what case will the
induced current have the maximum value provided that other conditions are equal? If the
inclination of the Earth is 70°, in which case (a or b) will the induced current be stronger?
them being 1200 cm2. The inductor rotates at a speed of 20 revolutions per second.
Calculate the average value of induced emf and the maximum value of the magnetic flux
through a turn for each case of Exercise 15.4.1, considering that the horizontal compo­
and contains 1000 turns, uniformly increases by 1 ampere per second. Another coil con­
taining 100 turns is put onto the first one. What emf will be induced in the second coil?
the poles of an electromagnet. Its ends are connected to a measuring instrument which
shows that an induced charge of 6.28 C passes through the coil when it is taken out of
the field or when the electromagnet is switched off. The resistance of the coil is 50 fl and
the resistance of the galvanometer is 1550 0. Calculate the magnetic induction in the
space between the poles of the magnet.
an area of 5 cm2 is introduced into a uniform field in the space between the poles of a
magnet so that the magnetic field lines are perpendicular to the planes of the turns. The
charge of 2 /*C has been induced thereby. Calculate the magnetic induction in the space
between the magnet poles.
turn the coil in the space between the poles so that the planes of its turns form an angle of
The emergence of induced emf in bodies moving in a magnetic field can easily be explained by
using the concept of the Lorentz force (Sec. 14.5). Let us suppose that a body, say, rod ab
moves in a magnetic field of induction B. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that the direc­
tions of rod ab, magnetic induction B and velocity of motion v are at right angles (Fig. 268).
Emergence of electromagnetic induction due to the Lorentz force. An emf directed from b to
a is induced between points a and b of the rod.
The motion of the rod involves the motion of positive and negative charges constituting the
molecules of the rod. The charges of both signs move m the same direction together with the
rod ab. According to Sec. 14.5, the magnetic field exerts on these charges the Lorentz force
which tends to shift positive charges to one side (end b) and negative charges to the other side
called the induced emf.
In the moving rrtetal rod, the positive ions constituting its lattice cannot move along it,
while the negative charges (mobile electrons) will accumulate in excess at the end a\ the end b
will have a deficit of electrons. The emerging voltage Uab determines the induced emf. If we
consider the motion of an electrolyte column, under the action of the Lorentz forces positive
and negative ions are accumulated at opposite ends of the column. In the case of a dielectric’s
motion, the separation of charges under the effect of the Lorentz forces leads to its polariza-
Chapter 15
tion (see Sec. 2.26). These concepts are especially convenient for the analysis of induced emf
emerging in open loops, say, in a rod falling in the magnetic field of the Earth.
It goes without saying that with the help of the rules of vector decomposition and indica­
tions (see Sec. 14.5) about the direction of the Lorentz force, we can easily analyze the cases
when the direction of motion and the direction of the magnetic Held form with each other and
with the conductor angles other than 90°. In particular, it can easily be seen that the induced
emf is equal to zero if a conductor moves in parallel to the magnetic field, i.e. the angle be­
tween the velocity v of charges and the direction of the magnetic induction B is zero.
Naturally, the Lorentz forces cannot be used for visual interpretation of the emergence of
induced emf when electromagnetic induction is due to the variation of the field B in stationary
conductors. But for moving conductors, when the analysis with the help of the Lorentz forces
is applicable, it gives not only a qualitative idea but also a correct quantitative expression for
induced emf.
Let us consider again the simple experiment with a current induced in a
wire loop placed in a varying magnetic field (Fig. 269a). This loop is clos­
ed, and its circuit does not contain a galvanometer which would indicate
the current induced in the loop. This current, however, can be detected
fig . 269.
In a conductor placed in a varying magnetic field, a current is induced, which heats the con­
ductor: (a) the wire resistance is high, and its heating is weak; (b) the resistance of the loop
made of a thicker wire is lower, and it is heated more strongly; (c) the loop is replaced by a
metal plate with a small hole at the middle, and it is heated to a still larger extent; (d) the loop
is replaced by a solid metal plate; the currents induced in such a plate heat it considerably.
from the heating accompanying the passage of current through the loop
size (Fig. 269b), the induced emf <£md will remain unchanged (since the rate
of variation of the magnetic flux, A$/At, is the same), but the resistance of
the loop will be smaller. As a result, the induced current I will increase.
Since the power liberated in the loop in the form of heat is proportional to
I£mi, the reduction of the resistance of the loop will cause stronger heating.
last loop is a solid metal plate placed in a varying magnetic field. Clearly,
we could take a thick piece of metal instead of such a plate. As it should be
.expected, experiments indicate that such a piece of metal is heated in a
varying magnetic field, this heating being rather strong. This points to the
fact that a variation o f a m agnetic flu x causes induced currents not only in
wire loops but in bulky pieces o f m etal as well.
These currents are usually called eddy currents, or Foucault currents
after the French physicist J. Foucault (1819-1868) who discovered them.
Their magnitude and direction depend on the shape of the piece of metal
placed in the field, on the direction of varying magnetic flux, on the prop­
erties of the metal and, naturally, on the rate of variation of the magnetic
flux. Generally, the distribution of eddy currents in a metal may be very
complicated.
In sufficiently thick samples, i.e. those having large dimensions in the
direction perpendicular to the direction of induced current, eddy currents
can be very strong due to small resistance and may cause considerable
heating. If, for example, we pass an alternating current which changes its
magnitude and direction 100 times per second (passing through zero and
attaining its maximum value again) through a coil with a thick metal core,
the core will be heated significantly. This heating due to induced (eddy)
currents is caused by the continuous variation of the magnetic flux piercing
the core. If we make the core of individual thin wires insulated by layers of
lacquer or oxide, the resistance of the core in the direction normal to its
axis, i.e. the resistance to eddy currents, increases significantly, and the
heating becomes much weaker. This method, viz. the separation of solid
iron pieces into thin insulated layers, is widely used in all electrical
machines to reduce their heating due to currents induced in a varying
magnetic field. On the other hand, Foucault currents are used in so-called
induction furnaces for strong heating and even melting of metals.
Like all other induced currents, eddy currents obey Lenz’s law, i.e. they are directed so
that their interaction with the primary magnetic field opposes the motion causing the induc­
tion. A simple experiment for the verification of the applicability of Lenz’s law to eddy cur­
rents is shown in Fig. 270. A magnetic needle is suspended on a thread. Being left to itself, it
Oscillations of a magnetic needle suspended on a string rapidly attenuate if a bulky piece of
metal is placed near the needle.
Chapter 15
will be in the equilibrium position, i.e. will be oriented along the magnetic meridian passing
through a given point (approximately from North to South). Being deflected, it will oscillate
about this position for quite a long time. The oscillations of the needle, like those of a pen­
dulum, will attenuate very slowly if the friction in the suspension is very small. Let us now
place a bulky copper slab very close under the needle. We shall see that now the oscillations of
the magnetic needle attenuate much quicker: the needle returns to the equilibrium position
after one or two swings. The reason is quite clear. The motion of the magnetic needle induces
eddy currents in the slab. According to Lenz’s law, their interaction with the magnetic field
opposes the motion of the magnetic needle. The kinetic energy imparted to the needle by
pushing it is rapidly converted through eddy currents into the internal energy of the slab,
which is manifested in its heating. Similar “magnetic damping” is employed in many electrical
measuring instruments.
The interaction between Foucault currents and a magnetic needle can be observed also in
the following modification of the above experiment. We fix a copper disc to a centrifuge and
make the disc rotate at a high speed. A magnetic needle suspended above the disc is turned,
following the disc, and twists the thread on which it is suspended. The reason is quite clear:
when the disc moves relative to the magnetic needle, eddy currents are induced in it. Accord­
ing to Lenz’s law, their interaction with the magnetic needle opposes the motion of the disc or,
according to Newton’s third law, entrains the magnetic needle. It is interesting to recall that
this experiment was made by Arago as far back as the beginning of the 19th century, before
the electromagnetic induction was discovered. It could not, however, be explained till Fara­
day, who discovered electromagnetic induction, interpreted his experiment as its manifesta­
tion.
strong electromagnet and set in rapid rotation, it becomes heated so that water soon boils
in it. Explain this experiment. At the expense of what energy is the cylinder with water
heated?
To Exercise 15.6.2.
To Exercise 15.6.3.
tions between the poles of a strong electromagnet 2 (Fig. 271). When there is no current
in the winding of the electromagnet, the pendulum shifted from the equilibrium position
performs a large number of swings before it comes to a halt. If, however, the current is
switched on, the pendulum is stopped abruptly as soon as it reaches the space between
the poles. Explain this phenomenon.
tromagnet (Fig. 272) with a current switched on in the winding, it does not fall with or­
dinary velocity but goes down slowly, as if passing through a very viscous liquid. Why is
it so?
thread between the poles of an electromagnet (Fig. 273), twist the thread and then
To Exercise 15.6.4.
release, the cube will rapidly rotate about the vertical axis. When the current in the elec­
tromagnet is switched on, the rotation of the cube is stagnated, the stagnation being
stronger when the cube is suspended at hook 1 (Fig. 273a) than when it is suspended at
hook 2 (Fig. 273£). Explain these experiments. Take into account the direction of in­
duced (Foucault) currents and the direction of the magnetic induction B indicated in the
Magnetic Properties of Bodies
Till now, we considered magnetic fields only in vacuum or, which is prac­
tically the same, in air. Let us investigate magnetic fields in various
substances, and first of all in iron and similar materials exhibiting strong
magnetization.
<*» A current is induced in coil II fitted into solenoid I, when the key is closed in the circuit of the
solenoid. The current is smaller in the absence of an iron core in the solenoid (a) than when the
core is present (b).
We shall analyze the experiment shown schematically in Fig. 274. An
inductance coil II is fitted on solenoid I. A so-called ballistic galvanometer,
i.e. the galvanometer with a long period of oscillations of a movable part,
is connected to coil II. The peculiar feature of this instrument is that when
current pulses of a duration considerably (at least 10 times) smaller than
the period of oscillations of the movable part are passed through it, the
maximum deviation of the movable part from the equilibrium position
turns out to be proportional to the charge q passed through the
galvanometer.
When a certain current flows through the solenoid, a certain magnetic
flux $ passes through coil II. When the current is switched off, the
magnetic flux drops to zero so that the change in the magnetic flux is
A$ = $, i.e. it is equal to the initial value of the magnetic flux. This change
occurs during a certain time interval At. The average value of the emf in-
duced in coil II is given by
_ A4> _ 4>
Ind " a7 “ T t ‘
If the resistance of the circuit containing coil II (i.e. the total resistance
of the coil, galvanometer and leads) is R , the average value of the current
through the galvanometer over the time At is
/= = ±± R At '
The charge passing through the galvanometer is
q = IA t = — .
This charge can be determined by the deflection of the pointer of the
ballistic galvanometer (see Exercises 15.4.4 and 15.4.5). It follows from
what has been said above that by measuring the deflection of the pointer of
the ballistic galvanometer caused by the current passed through the
solenoid, we can determine the initial value of the magnetic flux (since the
flux $ is proportional to the deflection of the pointer).
Let us make the above experiment twice. The current in solenoid I will
be the same in both cases, but in the second experiment we preliminarily in­
troduce into the solenoid an iron core (Fig. 274b). It will be seen that in the
second experiment (with the iron core), the deflection of the galvanometer
pointer, and hence the initial value of the flux $ , is much larger than in the
first experiment (without the core). In order to obtain the same deflection
of the galvanometer pointer without a core, the current in solenoid I must
be increased many times. But the increase in the primary current in
solenoid I corresponds to an increase in the initial value of the magnetic
flux in this solenoid, and consequently in the flux piercing coil II. Thus, the
introduction o f the iron core considerably increases the initial value o f the
m agnetic flu x . Repeating this experiment with cores having different
thickness, we find that the increase in the magnetic flux will be the larger
the larger volume of the solenoid is filled with iron. The maximum increase
is observed when the entire volume in the solenoid is filled with iron, i.e.
when the winding is tightly wound on an iron core.
Strictly speaking, the maximum increase in the magnetic flux is ob­
served when all the magnetic field lines pass through the substance of the
core. This pertains to a solenoid densely wound on a core made in the form
of a closed ring (Fig. 275a). If, however, the length of the solenoid is much
larger than its transverse dimensions and if the solenoid is wound on a core
Chapter 16
The presence of an iron core increases the magnetic flux in a solenoid: (a) the maximum
magnetic flux can be obtained with a core in the form of a closed ring; (b) a large increase in
the magnetic flux can also be attained in the case of a long and thin solenoid with a core hav­
ing protruding ends. In both cases, the primary I should be densely wound on the core.
which is longer than the solenoid, then an inductance coil placed at the
middle of the solenoid will be pierced practically by the entire flux
In this case, the ratio of the magnetic fluxes in the solenoid wound on
the core and in the same solenoid without a core depends only on the core
material (of course, provided that the primary current in the winding has
the same magnitude). This ratio is different for different grades of iron and
steel. Denoting it by the Greek letter /*, we can write
$ = m*0 where $ is the magnetic flux in the coil with a core and $0 is the magnetic
flux in the coil without a core.
The quantity n characterizing the magnetic properties of iron used for a
core is known as (magnetic) permeability.* As was mentioned above,
See the text following formula (12.3.4). — Eds.
Under the effect of the magnetic field of the solenoid, Ampere’s currents in the iron core are
oriented so that their direction coincides with that of the current in the solenoid.
measurements show that the presence of an iron core increases the
magnetic flux considerably (sometimes by a factor of a few thousand).
Thus, it can be stated that the permeability o f iron is rather large and in
some cases may reach the value of several thousands.
The increase in the magnetic flux caused by the introduction of iron in­
to a solenoid can easily be explained with the help of the concept of
Ampere’s molecular currents. Under the action of the magnetic field of the
solenoid, Ampere’s currents in the iron core tend to be oriented in parallel
to the current in the solenoid winding (Fig. 276). This explains the
magnetization of iron and the increase in the magnetic field in the sur­
rounding space as well as the increase in the magnetic flux through the
solenoid caused by the introduction of the core into it: the magnetic flux
produced by oriented Ampere’s currents is added to the ipagnetic flux due
to the current in the solenoid winding.
In the experiment shown in Fig. 274, the flux through a turn of coil II is
BS, where B is the magnetic induction of the field in the solenoid and S is
the cross-sectional area of the solenoid. The flux $ appearing in formula
follows that the /*-fold increase of the flux $ indicates that the magnetic in­
duction B in the iron core is n times larger than the magnetic induction B0
space formerly occupied with the field of induction B0 increases the
magnetic induction by a factor of
B = pB0.
It was mentioned in Sec. 12.3 that along with the magnetic induction B ,
which is the basic force characteristic 2 of magnetic field, an auxiliary
determines the force acting on currents and charges (see formulas (14.2.1) and (14.5.1)). —
Eds. Chapter 16
characteristic H turns out to be useful in some cases. This characteristic is
connected with B through the relation [see (12.3.4)]
B = hH H
and is called the magnetic field strength [it should be recalled that is the
magnetic constant, see formula (12.3.2)].
When applied to the experiment under consideration, formula (16.1.3)
gives B0 = HqH0 (in the absence of the core when n = 1) and B = hhqH
liHoH = ii/IqH q or
H = H0.
Thus, the magnetic field strength does not depend on whether the
solenoid is filled with a material. If the entire space where the magnetic
field differs from zero is rilled with a homogeneous substance, the
magnetic field strength does not depend on the properties of this
substance.3
Paramagnetics and Diamagnetics
If cores of other materials than iron are used in experiments considered
above, a change in the magnetic flux will also be observed. It would be
similar in their magnetic properties to iron (like nickel, cobalt and some
magnetic alloys). Indeed, when a core made of such a material is intro­
duced into a coil, the magnetic flux increases considerably. In other words,
we can say that the permeability of these materials is high: for example, the
value of /x can be as high as 50 for nickel and 100 for cobalt. The materials
having large n are combined in a group of ferromagnetic materials.
However, all other “nonmagnetic” materials also somehow influence
the magnetic flux, although their effect is much weaker in comparison with
ferromagnetics. The change in the magnetic flux can be detected with the
help of very thorough measurements, and the permeability of various
materials can thus be determined. It should be borne in mind, however,
that in the experiment described above the magnetic flux in a coil with a
cavity rilled with iron was compared to the magnetic flux in a coil rilled
with air. As long as we speak about strongly magnetic materials such as
iron, nickel and cobalt, this circumstance is immaterial since the presence
magnetic field differs from zero is filled by a homogeneous substance. If the substance is
heterogeneous, or if it does not fill the entire space containing the field, the equality// = H 0 is
violated, and hence it cannot be stated that H does not depend on the properties of the
medium in which a magnetic field is produced. — Eds.
of air affects the magnetic flux but little. However, studying the magnetic
properties of other materials, in particularly air, we must compare the
magnetic flux in them with that in the absence of air (in vacuum). Thus, the
perm eability is the ratio o f the m agnetic flu xes in the m aterial under in­
vestigation and in vacuum (u = $ /$ 0). In other words, the perm eability o f
vacuum is taken as unity (if $ = $ 0 , then y = 1).
Measurements show that the permeability of all materials differs from
unity, although in most cases this difference is very small. It is remarkable
that permeability y of some materials is greater than unity, while for other
materials it is less than unity. This means that filling the cavity of a coil
with some materials increases the magnetic flux, while Ailing it with other
materials reduces the flux. The former materials are known as
param agnetics (y > 1), and the latter are diam agnetics ( y < 1). It follows
from Table 7 that the difference betweeen the value of y and unity is small
both for paramagnetics and diamagnetics.
Table 7. Permeability for Some Paramagnetics and Diamagnetics
Param agnetics
Air (gaseous)
Aluminium
Ebonite
Nitrogen (gaseous)
Oxygen (gaseous)
Oxygen (liquid)
Platinum
Tungsten
Diamagnetics
Bismuth
Copper
Glass
Gold Hydrogen (gaseous)
Silver
Water
Zinc /* It should be emphasized that for paramagnetics as well as for
diamagnetics, the permeability y does not depend on the magnetic induc­
tion of the external (magnetizing) Held, i.e. it is a constant quantity
characterizing a given substance. It will be shown later (see Sec. 16.6) that
this is not true for iron and other similar (ferromagnetic) materials.
The effect of paramagnetics and diamagnetics on magnetic flux, as well
as the effect of ferromagnetic materials, is explained by the fact that the
flux due to Ampere’s elementary currents is added to the magnetic flux
produced by the current in the winding of the coil. Param agnetic m aterials
increase the m agnetic flu x in the coil. This increase in the flux of the coil
filled with a paramagnetic indicates that under the action o f external
m agnetic fie ld , elem entary currents in param agnetics are oriented so that
their direction coincides with the direction o f the current in the winding
slightly differs from unity indicates that for
Chapter 16
Diamagnetic materials placed into a coil weaken the magnetic field of the solenoid. Elemen­
tary currents in diamagnetics are directed against the current in the solenoid.
paramagnetic materials this additional magnetic flux is very small, i.e.
paramagnetics are magnetized very weakly.
The decrease in the magnetic flux in a coil filled with a diamagnetic in­
dicates that the magnetic flux due to elementary Ampere’s currents is op­
posite to the magnetic flux in the coil, i.e. the elementary currents induced
by an external magnetic field in diamagnetics are opposite to the current in
the coil winding (Fig. 277). In this case also the small deviation of from
unity indicates that the additional flux due to these elementary currents is
small.
Faraday’s Experiments
The attraction of iron objects to magnets is the simplest and most striking
manifestation of the magnetic field, which historically served as an impetus
for the development of the theory of magnetism. It boils down to the ac­
tion of the magnetic field on oriented molecular currents of magnetized
iron. The effect of the magnetic field on paramagnetic materials must be
the same but much weaker since, as follows from the experiments described
in the previous section, the orientation of elementary currents in
paramagnetics is the same as in ferromagnetics: the magnetic flux due to
elementary currents enhances, although insignificantly, the magnetic flux
of the orienting field, and hence paramagnetic bodies are attracted to a
magnet (Fig. 278a).
In contrast to paramagnetics, diamagnetic bodies weaken the magnetic
flux o f the coil. This means that the direction of elementary currents in a
diamagnetic in an external magnetic field is such that their magnetic field is
opposite to the external field. Consequently, the effect of the external
magnetic field on diamagnetics is opposite to its action on ferro- and
paramagnetics, i.e. diamagnetic bodies are repelled from the magnet
We can express this fact in a different way. When we bring an iron body
to a magnet, it is magnetized so that unlike pole appears on its side facing
the pole of the magnet. The same occurs with a paramagnetic body
pole of the magnet which is nearer to the body, appears on the side of the
body facing the magnet (Fig. 278b). Figures 276 and 277 explain why
paramagnetic bodies are attracted to a magnet and diamagnetics are repell­
ed by it.
magnetizing magnet emerges on the end of the body which is close to the magnet. The
paramagnetic body is attracted to the magnet. (<b) Under similar conditions, the like pole
emerges at the closer end of a diamagnetic body, and the body is repelled from the magnet.
These very effects were observed by Faraday in 1845. Using a strong
electromagnet, Faraday established the ability of all bodies to be magnet­
ized and discovered that some bodies are attracted to a magnet while others
are repelled by it. He proposed the term paramagnetic to be used for the
former bodies and diamagnetic for the latter ones. Experiments on induc­
tion with para- and diamagnetic materials, similar to those described in
Sec. 16.1, were made much later when the magnetic properties of
diamagnetics and paramagnetics had already been established on the basis
of Faraday’s studies.
From the force of attraction or repulsion, one can judge about the quantitative measure
of the ability of a body to be magnetized. In other words, we can determine the permeability /*
for a given material. This method of measuring /x, based on the analysis of attraction or repul­
sion of a small body made of a given material, is more complicated theoretically than the
method described in Sec. 16.2 and based on the measuring of magnetic flux. However, this
method is more sensitive and, besides, it can be used for measuring in a small sample of a
material. On the other hand, the measurement of fi with the help of the induction method re-
quires filling of the entire cavity in a coil with a substance under investigation. The results of
measurements of n by these two methods are in good agreement.
parallel to each other, and their separation in the lower part is much smaller than in the
upper part. Balls made of different materials under investigation are suspended in turn
between the poles. The upper end of the thread is attached to a spiral spring whose
To Exercise 16.3.1
To Exercise 16.3.2.
stretching allows us to measure the force exerted by the magnet on the ball (spring
balance). It turns out that if a ball is made of aluminium, tungsten or platinum, this force
is directed downwards (the spring is stretched), while in the case of silver, gold, copper or
bismuth it is directed upwards (the spring is compressed). Explain this experiment.
poured in a U-tube, and one arm of the tube is placed between the poles of a strong elec­
tromagnet (Fig. 280). The liquid in this arm is raised or lowered depending on whether it
is a paramagnetic or a diamagnetic. Explain this phenomenon.
The theory which explains the difference in magnetic properties of materials on the basis of
the structure of individual particles constituting them, viz. atoms and molecules, is known as
the molecular theory o f magnetism. This theory is very complicated and is far from being
completed. For this reason, it cannot be considered here in detail. We shall only indicate the
main reasons behind the difference in the properties of paramagnetics and diamagnetics.
Each body, paramagnetic or diamagnetic, appears as nonmagnetized until an external
magnetic field is applied to it. But the mechanisms of magnetization of paramagnetics and
diamagnetics are different. Diamagnetics are bodies in which any particle (atom or molecule)
has no magnetic properties unless it is placed in an external field. Only the external field con­
verts these particles into elementary magnets (causes elementary currents) oriented in a certain
way. On the other hand, the elementary particles of paramagnetics are magnets (elementary
currents) themselves before an external field starts acting on them. Here the role of the exter­
magnets. Until the field acts on them, they are arranged at random, chaotically, and the
substance as a whole appears to be nonmagnetized. In a magnetic field, these elementary
magnets are arranged more or less in parallel chains, and the substance as a whole is magnet­
ized.
What is the difference in the structure of particles constituting paramagnetics and
diamagnetics? The atoms of all bodies contain a large number of moving electrons. Each elec­
tron forms an Ampere’s elementary circular current. But in atoms of a diamagnetic, before
they are introduced in a magnetic field, the magnetic actions of individual circular currents are
mutually compensated so that an atom as a whole is not an elementary magnet. When such a
■ubstance is introduced into a magnetic field, the Lorentz force acts on each electron, and
calculations show that the resultant of these forces leads to the emergence of an induced cur­
rent, i.e. the atom acquires the properties of an elementary magnet. Since these are induced
currents, according to Lenz’s law their direction must be opposite to the direction of the cur­
rent in the coil (which creates the external magnetic field), i.e. the magnetic flux due to these
currents must oppose the flux of the external field, and the diamagnetic body is repelled from
In atoms of paramagnetic materials, the magnetic effects of individual electrons do not
completely compensate one another so that the atom as a whole is an elementary magnet. The
action of an external magnetic field introduces order in the arrangement of these elementary
currents, the currents being oriented so that their direction predominantly coincides with the
direction of the current in the coil producing the external magnetic field. Therefore, the
magnetic flux due to elementary currents in this case enhances the flux produced by the coil,
and the paramagnetic body is attracted by the magnet.
Strictly speaking, diamagnetism is a property in common for all substances. An external
magnetic field exerts the same induction effects on the atoms of paramagnetics and
diamagnetics. But in paramagnetics this effect is suppressed by the orienting action of the ex­
ternal magnetic field which orders the intrinsic elementary currents of atoms.
Thus, diamagnetism and paramagnetism are explained by the difference in the atomic
and molecular structure of these substances.
It goes without saying that magnetization of ferromagnetic, paramagnetic
and diamagnetic bodies occurs not only when they are placed into a
solenoid but in general always when a substance is in a magnetic field. In
all cases, the magnetic field due to magnetization of the substance is added
to the magnetic field which existed before the substance was introduced in
it. As a result, the magnetic field changes. It follows from what was said in
the previous section that the strongest changes occur in a magnetic field
when ferromagnetic bodies, in particular, iron, are introduced into it.4 The
change in the magnetic field in the vicinity of ferromagnetic bodies is con­
venient to observe with the help of field pattern formed by iron filings.
of rectangular shape is introduced in a magnetic field which was previously
uniform. It can be seen that the field is no longer uniform and becomes
rather complicated: it is enhanced in some regions and weakened in others.
For this reason, the problem of composition of fields produced by permanent magnets
is actually more complicated than it was described in Sec. 11.4. The introduction of the
second strong magnet leads not only to the superposition of its field with the field of the first
magnet but also to distortions of this field. What was said in Sec. 11.4 about the composition
of the fields of currents (in the absence of cores) does not require any stipulation.
Chapter 16
readings are introduced, which are determined by the shape and arrangement of the parts
of the ship and on the position of the compass on it. Explain why it is necessary to do so.
Do these corrections depend on the grade of steel used in constructing the ship?
made of wood and not of steel, and copper screws are used for fastening the side plank­
ing? The pattern observed when a closed iron vessel, say a hollow sphere, is
introduced in a magnetic field is interesting from the point of view of prac­
tical applications. It can be seen from Fig. 282 that as a result of the super­
position of the external magnetic field and the field of the magnetized iron
Magnetic field lines are concentrated in an iron
ring introduced into the magnetic field.
sphere, the field in the internal region of the sphere almost vanishes. This
effect is used for creating magnetic protection, or magnetic shielding, i.e.
for protecting measuring instruments, etc. from the action of external
magnetic fields.
The pattern observed in magnetic shielding resembles that in elec­
trostatic shielding with the help of a conducting shell. However, these
phenomena differ in principle. In the case of electrostatic shielding,
metallic walls can be as thin as desired. It is sufficient,for example, to silver
the surface of a glass vessel placed in an electric field to eliminate the Held
from its interior, since the field terminates at the surface of metal. In the
case of the magnetic field, however, thin iron walls do not protect the inner
space: magnetic field passes through iron, and a certain magnetic field ex­
ists in the vessel. Only sufficiently thick iron walls can weaken the field in
the cavity to such an extent that the magnetic protection becomes of prac­
tical significance, although in this case also the magnetic field does not
vanish altogether. In this case, the weakening of the field is not the result of
its termination on the surface of iron. The magnetic field lines do not ter­
minate but remain closed while passing through iron. Plotting the distribu­
tion of the magnetic field lines in the bulk of the iron and in the cavity, we
obtain the pattern shown in Fig. 283 which indicates that the weakening of
the field in the cavity is the result of the change in the direction of field lines
and not of their termination.
The distinguishing feature of ferromagnetic bodies is their ability to be
strongly magnetized, due to which the permeability of these bodies assumes
very large values. The permeability of iron, for example, attains values
thousand times higher than the values of n for dia- and paramagnetics. The
magnetization of ferromagnetics was studied experimentally by the Rus­
sian scientist A.G. Stoletov and others. These experiments also showed
that the permeability o f ferromagnetics, unlike that of para- and
diamagnetics, strongly depends on the magnetic field strength 5 at which it
is determined. For instance, in weak fields the permeability n of iron is as
high as 6000, while in strong fields the values of n drop to a few hundred
and even lower.
In Secs. 11.1 and 11.2, we introduced the vector quantity pm, called the
magnetic moment of current (see formula (11.1.1)), to characterize the
magnetic properties of current loops. Molecular currents also have
magnetic moments. When a substance is not magnetized, the magnetic
moments of individual molecular currents are oriented at random 5
Since H (unlike B) does not depend on ix (if the conditions specified in Sec. 16.1 are
fulfilled), it is expedient to consider the dependence /t on H (and not on B).
Chapter 16
substance as a whole has no magnetic moment.
Under the action of an external magnetic field, either the magnetic
moments of molecular currents are to a larger or smaller extent oriented
predominantly along the field (in ferro- and paramagnetics) or induced
molecular currents appear, whose magnetic moments are oriented against
the field (for diamagnetics, see Sec. 16.4). As a result, the total magnetic
moment of molecular currents becomes nonzero, and the body turns out to
be magnetized. It is natural to take for the measure of magnetization of a
substance the total magnetic moment o f molecular currents contained in a
unit volume o f the substance. In this connection, we introduce a vector
quantity J called the magnetization of a substance and defined by the
following expression:
J= P*. per unit
volume
where pm is the magnetic moment of an individual molecular current.
It can be shown that the magnetization J is related to the magnetic in­
duction B in the substance and the magnetic field strength H through the
following relation:
J = — - H.
Considering that B = nn0H, we obtain
J = (m - 1)H.
Replacing in formula (16.6.2) the vectors by their magnitudes, we write
the obtained relation in the form
B = + Mo*^ = N H 0 + UqJ =
+ (IqJ
HqH q = B0 is the magnetic induction of the solenoid in the absence of the
substance). We multiply this expression by the cross-sectional area S of the
solenoid:
BS — BqS + HqJS.
The product BS is equal to $ , the magnetic flux through the solenoid cross
section, and B0S is equal to the magnetic flux $0 in the absence of a
substance. Consequently, we arrive at the formula
* = *<,+ Mo-tf = *o +
where
denotes the expression /i0JS, which can be treated as the addi­
tional magnetic flux produced by the magnetized substance:
= Mo/S.
For ferromagnetic and paramagnetic materials, the flux is positive ($ >
$0), while for diamagnetics it is negative ($ < $0).
Thus, the magnetization J is proportional to the additional flux which
is created by the magnetized substance.
Considering that $ = /*$0, we can easily obtain from formula (16.6.4)
die following relation:
*' = mo/S = ( /x - l)*o-
An analysis of the dependence of the magnetization of iron and other
ferromagnetic materials on the strength of the external magnetic field
reveals some peculiar properties of these materials which are important for
practical purposes. Let us place a piece of nonmagnetized iron into a
magnetic field and measure the magnetization J of the iron gradually in­
creasing the strength H o f the external magnetic field. The magnetization J
increases strongly at first, then the increase becomes slower and slower.
Finally, when H attains the values of about 104 A/m , the magnetization
does not increase any further: all elementary currents have already been
oriented, and the iron has reached the state of magnetic saturation.
Graphically, the dependence of 7 on /f in the experiment under considera­
tion is depicted by the curve Oa in Fig. 284. The horizontal part of this
curve near the point a corresponds to magnetic saturation.
Dependence of magnetization J on the strength H of the external magnetic Held. Arrows in­
dicate the direction of the process.
After the saturation has been reached, the magnetic field is decreased.
The magnetization of the iron then decreases, this decrease being slower
than its former increase. The dependence of J o n H is now depicted by the
branch ab of the curve in Fig. 284. Thus, the same value of H may have
different values of magnetization corresponding to it (points x, x ' and x "
in Fig. 284) depending on whether this value is approached from larger or
Chapter 16
smaller values of H. Consequently, the magnetization of iron depends not
only on the magnetic field in which the sample is placed but also on the
previous history of the sample. This phenomenon is known as hysteresis.
When the external magnetic Held vanishes, iron still retains a certain
residual magnetization (Sec. 10.1), which is characterized by the segment
Ob of the graph. For this reason, iron and steel can be used for manufac­
turing permanent magnets.
For further demagnetization of iron, an external magnetic field op­
posite to the initial field must be applied. The variation of the magnetiza­
tion J with increasing magnetic field strength of this opposite field is
depicted by the branch bed of the curve. Only when the strength of this
field attains a certain value (corresponding to segment Oc in our experi­
ment), the iron will be demagnetized completely (point c). Thus, the
strength of the demagnetizing field (segment Oc) is the measure of the
stability of magnetization of the iron. It is usually called the coercive force.
As the magnitude of the strength of the opposite magnetic field decreases
to zero and the magnitude of the magnetic field strength in the initial direc­
tion increases, the variation of the magnetization is described by the branch
db 'a of the curve.
If we repeat the cycle of demagnetization, magnetization reversal and
repeated magnetization in the initial direction, the curve repeats itself.6
function of the strength H of the external magnetic field has the shape of a
loop. It is known as the hysteresis loop for a given grade of iron or steel.
The shape of the hysteresis loop is the most important characteristic of
magnetic properties of a ferromagnetic material. In particular, from the
hysteresis loop the important properties of this material can be determined,
such as its magnetic saturation, residual magnetization and coercive force.
The process of magnetization of a substance can be characterized not
only by the curve describing / as a function of H (Fig. 284), but also by the
B vs. H curve. These two dependences are clearly connected with each
other. The former dependence has the form / = (/t — 1)H (see formula
shows B vs. //curves for different grades of iron and steel. From the shape
of the loop we can choose the material which is most suitable for a practical
problem. For example, for manufacturing permanent magnets, a material
with a large coercive force is required (like steel and especially some grades
The branch Oa represents the magnetization of the originally nonmagnetized material
and is not repeated in the following cycles. In order to reproduce the branch Oa, it is necessary
to bring the material to the initial nonmagnetized state. For this purpose, it is sufficient, for
example, to heat it strongly.
Magnetization curves for different grades of iron
and steel: 1 — soft iron, 2 — hardened steel,
of steel containing cobalt). For electric machines, and especially for
transformers, materials with a small area of the hysteresis loop are most
suitable since they turn out to be less heated during magnetization
reversal.7 For some special instruments, materials with magnetic satura­
tion attained in weak fields are most suitable, and so on.
In contrast to paramagnetics and diamagnetics (Sec. 16.2), the
permeability /t of ferromagnetics does not remain constant but depends on
the strength H of the external magnetic field. This dependence is shown in
that the permeability u has small initial values for weak fields, then in­
creases to the maximum value and decreases with a further increase in the
magnetic field strength.
It is important to note that when a certain temperature is attained, the
permeability of ferromagnetics sharply drops to a value close to unity. This
temperature, which is typical of every ferromagnetic material, is known as
the Curie point named after the French physicist P. Curie (1859-1906). A t a
temperature above the Curie point, all ferromagnetics become
paramagnetics. The Curie point is equal to 767 °C for iron, 360 °C for
Curie point lies near 100 °C.
Here we speak not about the heating under the action of eddy currents (Foucault currents) which is observed for all metals placed in a varying magnetic field, but about the
heating of ferromagnetic bodies due to magnetization reversal, which is associated with a sort
of internal friction in the substance where magnetization is reversed.
Chapter 16
fig . 286.
Mvs. H dependence: / — for a magnetic alloy (permalloy), 2 — for soft iron.
permanent magnets? Which of them is best for manufacturing electromagnets whose
lifting force can be easily controlled?
gots?
Unlike diamagnetism and paramagnetism, which are the properties of in­
dividual atoms and molecules of a substance, ferromagnetic properties of a
substance are explained by the peculiarities of its crystalline structure. For
example, atoms of iron in the vapour state are themselves diamagnetic or
weakly paramagnetic. Ferromagnetism is the property o f iron in the solid
state, i.e. the property o f iron crystals.
This is confirmed by a number of facts. First of all, this follows from
the dependence of the magnetic properties of iron and other ferromagnetic
materials on the treatment which changes their crystalline structure
diamagnetic metals can be used for manufacturing alloys having perfect
ferromagnetic properties. This is true, for example, for Heusler alloy
which has almost as good magnetic properties as those of iron although it
consists of weakly magnetic metals such as copper (60%), manganese
romagnetic materials, like the one consisting of 75% iron and 25% nickel,
are almost nonmagnetic. Finally, the most convincing evidence is the fact
that when a certain temperature is attained (Curie point), all ferromagnetic
materials lose their ferromagnetic properties.
Ferromagnetics differ from paramagnetics not only in a rather high value of the
permeability ji and in its dependence on the magnetic Held strength, but also in a peculiar
dependence of the magnetization on the strength of the magnetizing field. This peculiarity is
manifested in the phenomenon of hysteresis and all its consequences: residual magnetization
and coercive force.
What is the reason behind the hysteresis? The shape of the curves in Figs. 284 and 285,
viz. the difference between the rate of increase in the magnetization of a ferromagnetic with
increasing H and the course of its demagnetization with decreasing H, indicates that when the
magnetization of the ferromagnetic changes, i.e. when the strength of the external magnetic
field is increased or decreased, the orientation and disorientation of elementary magnets does
A detailed analysis of magnetization and demagnetization of iron and other fer­
romagnetic materials shows that the ferromagnetic properties of a substance are determined
paramagnetic, but by the magnetization of the whole regions called domains 8. This term is
applied to small regions of the substance containing a very large number of atoms. The in­
teraction of magnetic moments of individual atoms in a ferromagnetic leads to the formation
of extremely strong intrinsic magnetic Helds acting within each domain and arranging within
such a region all atomic magnets in parallel to one another as shown in Fig. 287. Thus, even in
M t M
H I M
♦M M ♦ .M M
t t t t t
♦ ♦ t t t
M i l l
♦ M M
♦M M t t t t t
: : : : :
<b) Orientation of molecular magnets in regions 1 and 2 of spontaneous magnetization: (a) in the
absence of the external magnetic field; (b) under the action of the external magnetic field
regions 1 and 2 are rearranged.
Chapter 16
the absence of an external field, a ferromagnetic consists of a number of individual regions
each of which is spontaneously magnetized to saturation. But the directions of magnetization
are different for different domains so that the body turns out to be nonmagnetized in the
absence of an external magnetic field in view of the random distribution of these regions.
Under the effect of an external magnetic field, such regions of spontaneous magnetiza­
tion are rearranged and regrouped. As a result, the regions in which the magnetization is
parallel to the external field dominate, and the substance as a whole is found to be magnetiz­
ed. An example of such a rearrangement of the regions of spontaneous magnetization is
shown in Fig. 287. Two adjacent regions represented schematically have magnetizations
directed at right angles. When the external field is applied, a fraction of atoms in region 2,
where the magnetization is perpendicular to the field, are turned at the boundary with region
/, where the magnetization is parallel to the field, so that the direction of their magnetic
moments becomes parallel to the field. As a result, region 1 magnetized in parallel to the exter­
with the direction of the field, and preferential magnetization of the body in the direction of
the external field is observed. In very strong external fields, all atoms within the the entire
region may get oriented in the direction of the field.
If the external field is removed (or reduced), the inverse process of disintegration and
disorientation of these regions takes place, i.e. the body is demagnetized.
In view of the large size of spontaneous magnetization regions in comparison with atomic
dimensions, the orientation (as well as the reverse process of disorientation) of these regions
encounters more difficulties than in the case of individual atoms or molecules in
paramagnetics and diamagnetics. For this reason, magnetization and demagnetization lag
behind the variations of the external field, i.e. hysteresis is observed.
Alternating Current
In electric current generators considered above, i.e. the Wimshurst
machines and galvanic cells (see Sec. 6.2), accumulators (Sec. 6.6), and
thermocouples (Sec. 6.10), the emf does not change its direction with time.
The positive electrode always remains positive and the negative electrode
remains negative: the current in the external circuit flows in the same direc­
tion, viz. from the positive electrode to the negative one. Such a current is
called direct, or constant. The emf, and hence the voltage across the
generator terminals, as well as the current in the circuit, remain constant
until some internal changes occur in the generator itself, i.e. until the
polarization of electrodes in galvanic cells becomes significant, or the rate
of rotation of the electrostatic machine is altered, or the temperature dif­
ference between the junctions in the thermocouple is varied.
On the other hand, an alternating em f which continuously changes its
magnitude and whose direction is changed many times per second is always
produced in the generators installed in electric power plants and producing
currents used for lighting, driving electric engines (motors) and other pur­
poses. Some features of these generators will be considered in the next
chapter, but the knowledge of the basic principle of their construction will
be required at the moment in order to explain the emergence of alternating
emf. In modern engineering, induction generators are mainly used, i.e. the
machines in which an emf is generated as a result of electromagnetic induc­
tion. A schematic diagram of such a generator, which includes all the parts
of primary importance, is shown in Fig. 288. A steel frame 2, whose ends
are soldered to rings 3 and 4 rotating with it, is placed between the poles of
a strong magnet 1. Flexible plates 5 and 6 (so-called brushes) are pressed
against the rings and connected to the external circuit by wires. As the
frame rotates in the magnetic field, the magnetic flux piercing it con­
tinuously changes, and hence an emf is induced in the frame. Thus, the
process occurring in all industrial-scale current generators is a version of
the fundamental Faraday’s experiment considered in Sec. 15.1, carried out
on a very large scale.
Chapter 17
Let us now consider in more detail the magnitude of the emf induced in
the frame. For simplicity, we shall assume that the magnetic field in which
the frame rotates is uniform. The magnetic flux $ through the frame (see
Sec. 15.1) is the product of the magnetic induction of the field and the area
bounded by the frame and the sine of the angle <pbetween the plane of the
frame and the direction of the field:
$ = BS sin ip.
If the frame rotates uniformly and completes a turn in time T, the angle by
which the frame turns per unit time is 2v/T . Therefore, if the time is
measured from the moment when the frame is parallel to the field lines, the
value of the angle <p at a certain instant t will be (2x/T)t. Denoting the
rotational speed of the frame, i.e. the number of its revolutions per unit
time, by v and the angular velocity (see Vol. 1) by «, we can write
T ’ _ . Consequently,
<P = Substituting this expression into the formula for the magnetic flux, we
see that the law of its variation with time has the form
$ = BS sin <j)t.
Time variation of instantaneous values of (a) magnetic flux 4>; (b) induced emf <£ind in the ex­
periment shown in Fig. 288.
The curve representing the time dependence of the magnetic flux through
the frame is a sinusoid (Fig. 289a). The magnetic flux changes its sign twice
over a complete turn, vanishing at the moments when the frame is parallel
to the direction of the field and attaining its maximum values (of either
sign) when the frame is perpendicular to the field.
The emf induced in the frame is determined not by the magnitude of the
magnetic flux but by the rate of its variation, i.e. by the quantity A i/A t
also does not remain constant but continuously varies during the rotation
of the frame. Figure 289a shows the magnetic flux variation A# over iden­
tical periods of time At for the instant t = 0, when $ = 0, and for t = 774,
when has the maximum value. The former value of A# is much larger
than the latter, and hence the instantaneous value of the induced emf at­
tains its maximum at t = 0 and then decreases, attaining the zero value by
the moment 774.
With the further rotation of the frame, the emf changes its sign. In­
deed, according to Lenz’s law (see Sec. 15.2), the induced emf always has a
Chapter 17
direction such that the magnetic field of the current produced by this emf
opposes the process that has caused the induction. Therefore, during the
first quarter of a period, when the magnetic flux through the frame in­
creases, the magnetic field of the induced current must supress the external
field, while during the next quarter of a period, when the magnetic field
decreases, it must enhance this field. Thus it becomes clear that tl.e sign of
the emf should be reversed as it passes through zero.
values of the induced emf. It can be shown that this curve, as well as the
graph of the magnetic flux, is a sinusoid which is shifted by a quarter of a
period relative to the sinusoid representing the variation of the magnetic
flux.
Indeed, for an instant t the flux $ = BS sin w/, while for the instant t + At the flux is
= BS sin co {t + At). Consequently, the change in the flux over the time At is
A$ = - $ = B S[sin o)(t + AO - sin cot].
In accordance with a well-known trigonometric formula this expression can be written in the
form If At is very small, sin (coAt/2) = coAt/2, while cos [co(t -I- At/2)] = cos cot. Thus, the
change in the flux over the small time At is
A$ = BS<j) cos cot •At.
Consequently, the emf equal to - A $/A t can be written as
i.e. it is indeed represented by a sinusoid of the same frequency, but shifted by t / 2 (a quarter
of the period). 1
It goes without saying that the instantaneous value of the voltage u be­
tween the generator terminals or between any two points in the circuit also
varies in accordance with the sine law. The curves representing the varia­
tion of this quantity have the same shape as the ones shown in Fig. 289 for
the induced emf. These curves are said to reproduce the “shape” of alter­
voltage is also alternating, its “shape” being similar to the “shape” of the
voltage.1
In Sec. 15.4, the expression for <fjnd was written in the form A i/A t. However, consider­
ing Lenz’s law, it must be written in a more rigorous form —A i/A t. — Eds.
Not only in our model, but also in machines employed in electrical
engineering, we encounter mostly voltages and currents which can be
regarded as sinusoidal. The law of variation of instantaneous values of
these quantities with time is expressed by the formulas
u = Um sin cot, i = Im sin wf,
where Um and Im denote the maximum values of voltage and current
respectively.
Alternating Current. Oscillograph
The fact that the current supplied by electric power plants is indeed alter­
verified with the help of the following simple experiment. We connect an
ordinary bulb to a circuit and carefully bring to it a permanent magnet so
that the filament of the lamp is perpendicular to the magnetic field lines.
The filament will be seen to spread into a bright band. This indicates that
the filament rapidly vibrates in the field of the magnet, being deflected to
both sides from the equilibrium position. But it is well known that a direct
current is deflected in a permanent magnetic field to one side. Consequent­
ly, our experiment indicates that the current in the bulb filament changes
its direction many times per second.
Although this simple experiment proves that the current in the lighting
system is alternating, it does not allow us to establish the law of variation
of instantaneous values of current, i.e. to analyze its shape. If the frame in
the experiment represented in Fig. 288 were rotated at a sufficiently slow
rate, we would see that the pointer of a galvanometer connected to the ex­
ternal circuit deviates now to one side and then to the other. Watching the
deviations of the pointer, we could get an idea about the shape of this cur­
rent. However, the industrial alternating current reverses its direction so
Schematic diagram of a loop oscillograph: 1 —
oscillograph loop with alternating current, 2 — mirror
fixed to the loop and rotating about the axis OO.
Chapter 17
frequently that conventional galvanometers cannot follow these variations
because the inertia of the movable part (frame) of the galvanometer is too
large. More “responsive* instruments are required for investigating the
form of industrial alternating current and currents having still higher
frequencies. The instruments intended for investigating rapidly varying
currents and voltages are called oscillographs.
The construction of a simple oscillograph is shown in Fig. 290. Essen­
tially, it is a modification of a mirror galvanometer in which the frame
rotating in the magnetic field and the mirror for observing the deflections
of the frame are made extremely light. The frame of the oscillograph is just
a very thin wire loop, suspended on elastic strings in the field of a magnet.2
When an alternating current is passed through such a frame, it starts
oscillating together with the mirror. The light spot reflected by the mirror
rapidly moves over a screen to either side, describing a segment of a
straight line perpendicular to the rotational axis of the mirror.
In order to obtain the curve representing the form of the current with
the help of an oscillograph the light beam reflected by the mirror is directed
ror rapidly rotating about its axis which coincides with the direction of mo­
tion of the light spot. Instead of the rotating mirror, it is convenient to take
a drum with mirror faces, and then the light beam can be reflected in turn
from each of its mirror faces during a single revolution of the drum. The
schematic diagram of such an instrument is shown in Fig. 291. Here the
Optical path of the ray reflected by the oscillograph
mirror: 1 — light source, 2 — directing | lens, 3 —
mirror, 4 — rotating mirror drum, 5 — screen.
mirror has the horizontal axis, while the drum rotates about the vertical
axis (normal to the plane of the figure). The rotation of the mirror causes
the displacement of the light spot on the screen in the up-down direction,
while the rotation of the drum displaces the spot to the left or to the right.
Clearly, the superposition of these motions will result in a certain curve
described by the light spot on the screen. Here the displacement of the spot
This explains the terms “mirror-galvanometer” or “loop” oscillograph applied to this
instrument.
along the vertical is proportional to the instantaneous value of the current
through the instrument, while its displacement along the horizontal is pro­
portional to the time since the drum is rotated uniformly. Thus, the obtain­
ed curve represents the form of the alternating current. Experiments show
that for the industrial current this curve is indeed close to a sinusoid. The
curves describing the form of industrial alternating voltage have a similar
shape.
The construction of the oscillograph described above is mainly used in experiments
visually demonstrating the form of an alternating current. In practical investigations of alter­
paper on which the light beam draws the corresponding curve.
A still more widely used instrument is the so-called cathode-ray oscillograph. Its main
part is the well-known cathode-ray tube (see Fig. 182). A voltage proportional to the current
under investigation is applied to the horizontal plates of the tube. Thus, the deflection of the
beam along the vertical (or the displacement of the bright spot on the screen of the tube) at
each moment of time is proportional to the instantaneous value of the current. The voltage
which uniformly increases from zero to a certain maximum value and then almost “instan­
taneously” drops to zero, then again uniformly increases, and so on, is applied to the vertical
plates of the tube with the help of a special device. The form of this “saw-tooth” voltage is
shown in Fig. 292. When such a voltage is applied, the bright spot on the oscillograph screen
moves along the horizontal, then “abruptly” returns to the initial position, again passes
through the same horizontal segment, and so on.
“Saw-tooth” shape of the voltage applied to the vertical
plates of a cathode-ray oscillograph for the time-base.
Obviously, when the voltage under investigation is applied to the horizontal plates of the
oscillograph simultaneously with the “saw-tooth” voltage applied to the vertical plates, the
bright spot on the screen draws a curve reproducing the form of the current or voltage under
investigation. The cathode-ray oscillograph is the most important tool for investigating alter­
Alternating Current and Voltage
Let us consider in greater detail the curve representing the time dependence
of an industrial current (or voltage) (Fig. 293). First of all, it is evident that
this current (or voltage) varies periodically, i.e. each instantaneous value of
these quantities, say, the one corresponding to point a (or point b), is
repeated in the same period of time. In other words, the current (or
voltage) runs during this time interval through all possible values and
returns to the initial value, i.e. completes one oscillation. The time interval
Chapter 17
during which the current (voltage) performs a complete oscillation and
assumes the previous (in magnitude and sign) instantaneous value is called
the period o f the alternating current. It is usually denoted by T. For
lighting circuits in the USSR and in many other countries, T = 1/50 s, and
since the current reverses its direction twice during a period, the industrial
current changes its direction 100 times per second.
The maximum value which can be assumed by an alternating current
while their instantaneous values, by i and u.
The number of complete oscillations (cycles) of a sinusoidal current or
voltage performed per unit time is called tht frequency of the correspond­
ing quantity and is denoted by v? Obviously, we have
v= -,
T =- .
For the unit of frequency, we take a frequency equal to one oscillation per
second. This unit is called the hertz (Hz) after the German physicist H.
Hertz (1857-1894). Thus, the industrial alternating current has the frequen­
cy of 50 Hz.
Instead of frequency v, the quantity u = 2-kv = 2ir/Tis also introduc­
ed. It is known as the cyclic, or circularfrequency of current (voltage). This
quantity is equal to the number of complete oscillations (cycles) performed
over 2x seconds.
As long as we deal with only one sinusoidal alternating current or
voltage, the frequency and the amplitude are complete and exhausting
characteristics of these quantities since the reference point for time can be
It should be noted that the concept of frequency has sense only for quantities varying
according to the sine law. This question will be considered again in Vol. 3.
taken arbitrarily. If, however, we have to compare two or more such quan­
tities, we must take into account the fact that they may attain their max­
imum values at different instants of time.
Two curves in Fig. 294a represent the shapes of two sinusoidal alter­
displaced relative to each other along the abscissa axis (time axis) by a seg­
ment equal to a quarter of a period. The time reference point is chosen so
that the zero values for the first curve are attained at the moments 0, 772,
T, 3772........ while the maximum values are attained at the instants 774,
Graphic representation of alternating currents of the same frequency and amplitude, which
are shifted in phase: (a) two sinusoidal currents with a phase shift of a quarter of the period;
period.
In such a case it is said that these two currents (or two other sinusoidal
quantities) are shifted relative to each other in phase. In other words, there
exists a certain phase shift (or phase difference) between them, which in
Chapter 17
our example constitutes a quarter of a period. Since curve 1 passes through
the maximum value (as well as through any other value), before curve 2 at­
tains this value, curve 1 is said to lead curve 2 in phase, or curve 2 is said to
lag behind curve 1 in phase.
of a period. Which of the curves lags behind curve 1 in phase and which leads it? What is
the phase shift between curves 2 and 3 ?
In all cases when we have to compare sinusoidal quantities and consider
their simultaneous action (i.e. sum up or multiply them), the relation be­
tween their phases is of primary importance. Thus, in the general case
when we deal with several sinusoidal currents or voltages, each of them
should be characterized by three quantities: frequency, amplitude and
phase (to be more precise, the phase shift between a given current or
voltage and some other current relative to which we consider the phase
shift of all the remaining currents or voltages).
The relations between the phases of different sinusoidal altenating cur­
rents can be conveniently investigated with the help of a loop oscillograph
described in Sec. 17.2 and having not one but two individual frames
A two-loop oscillograph for simultaneous recording of
two alternating currents passing through loops 1 and 2.
time axis of the two currents passing through these loops are obtained with
a rotating drum so that the points of the two curves located on the screen
one under the other represent the instantaneous values of the currents be­
ing compared and correspond to the same instant of time.
An exact mathematical calculation of the phase of a sinusoidal alternating quantity (cur­
rent or voltage) can be carried out as follows. The instantaneous value of this quantity at the
instant of time t is determined by the value of the quantity at in the argument of the sine func­
tion in formula (17.1.2). If the time reference point has been chosen so that the instantaneous
value of the current becomes zero at the instants t = 0, T/2, T, ... , the other current will.
generally speaking, acquire the zero value at the instants t = t \ t ' + 772, / ' + T, ... , and
the law of its variation with time will have the form
i = Im sin a ( t - O = Im sin (at - *>),
where <pstands for the product a t '. The phase of current (or voltage) is in general the value of
the quantity in the argument of the sine function in formula (17.3.2), and the quantity <p =
a t ' = 2Tct V T determines the phase difference of the currents (or voltages) being compared. If
this quantity is positive, the first current leads in phase the second current, and if it is negative,
the first current lags behind the second current in phase. The phase is measured in radians.
It follows from what has been said above that the instantaneous value of
alternating current varies all the time between zero and the maximum
value. Nevertheless, the strength of an alternating current, like that of a
direct current, is characterized by a certain number of amperes. For exam­
ple, a current of 0.2S A is said to pass through a bulb, while a stronger cur­
rent of 0.5 A passes through another bulb, and so on. What is the meaning
of this statement? What do we mean by the strength of an alternating cur­
rent?
The strength of an alternating current could be characterized by its
amplitude. It is quite possible in principle, but practically inconvenient
since it is difficult to construct an instrument which would directly measure
the amplitude of an alternating current. It is more convenient to
characterize an alternating current with the help of a certain property
which does not depend on its direction. Such a property, for example, is
the ability of a current to heat a conductor through which it passes. This
heating does not depend on the direction of the current. It is observed when
an alternating current passes in the forward and in the backward direc­
tions.
Let us suppose that an alternating current passes through a certain con­
ductor having a resistance R. During a second, the current liberates in the
conductor a certain amount of heat, say, Q. Let us pass through this con­
ductor a direct current of such a strength that the same amount Q of heat is
liberated in the conductor per second. These currents are identical in their
thermal effects. For this reason, the strength of the direct current
characterizes the effective value o f the alternating current , denoted by /.
The strength o f the direct current liberating in a conductor the same
amount o f heat, as an alternating current does, is called the effective value
o f the alternating current.
It follows from what has been said above that, replacing the strength of
current I in formula (4.1.1) by the effective value / of the alternating cur­
rent, we can calculate the amount of heat liberated by the alternating cur-
Chapter 17
rent in a conductor:
Q = I 2Rt.
It should be emphasized once again that I in this formula stands for the ef­
fective value of the alternating current. When an alternating current is said,
for example, to be equal to 2 A, this means that the thermal effect of this
current is the same as that of a direct current of 2 A.
For a sinusoidal current, the effective value is related to the maximum
be obtained from calculations:
/ = /m/V2 = 0.707/m.
Thus, having measured the effective value of a sinusoidal current, we
can calculate its amplitude from formula (17.4.2).
of 50 0, through which an alternating current was passed for 2.5 h. What are the effec­
tive and the maximum values of this current?
ductor whose resistance is 10 Q. What is the effective value of this current?
value?
amplitude of this current?
The ammeters and voltmeters of the magnetoelectric system, described in
Sec. 14.4, can only be used for measuring direct current and voltage. It is
difficult to measure with these instruments an alternating current since any
reversal of the direction of the current changes the direction of the torque
rotating the pointer of the instrument. Such an instrument can be used for
measuring alternating current only after it has been supplied with a very
light mobile system. This is done, for example, in the construction of an
oscillograph (see Sec. 17.2).
It is much more convenient to measure alternating current with the help
of the instruments in which the direction of deflection of the pointer is in­
dependent of the direction of the current. Such instruments for measuring
alternating current include, above all, thermal instruments described in
Sec. 3.6. Rotation of the pointer in such instruments is caused by the
elongation of the thread heated by the current passing through it. This
heating does not depend on the direction of the current. The very definition
of the effective value of an alternating current (see Sec. 17.4) implies that
the deviation of the pointer in such an instrument due to the alternating
current passing through it is proportional to just the effective value of this
current.
The instruments of other systems (like electromagnetic systems) are also
used.
If we have at our disposal an ammeter suitable for measuring alter­
alternating voltages. For this purpose, it is sufficient to supply the instru­
ment with a series resistor and recalibrate it in volts (see Sec. 3.15). The
voltage measured in this way is also called the effective voltage and denoted
by U.
For a sinusoidal current, the effective value U of voltage is connected
with the amplitude value Um through a relation similar to (17.4.2):
U = t/m/V2 = 0.707 Um.
In order to explain a number of very important and peculiar processes oc­
curring in a.c. circuits, we must first consider a special form of induction
process known as self-induction.
Let us analyze once again the basic experiment on induction. Coil I
of this flux induces a current in coil II. As was mentioned above (see
Sec. 15.1), a current is induced in any conducting loop in which the
magnetic flux changes. But coil I itself is in the same position. Its turns are
also pierced by the magnetic flux produced by coil I proper. Therefore, any
change in the magnetic field produced by the current in this coil, i.e. any
variation of the current in the coil, induces an emf and a current in this
coil. Coil I produces the field and at the same time is an inductance coil. In
this case, induction is referred to as self-induction.
The existence of self-induction can easily be detected in an experiment.
We connect a coil formed by a few hundred turns and fitted on a closed
iron core to a 6 V bulb (Fig. 296). The coil can be connected with the help
of a switch to an accumulator producing a voltage of 2 V. Thus, when the
switch is on, the coil and the bulb are connected in parallel to the ac­
cumulator. When the switch is off, the closed circuit contains only the
turns of the coil and the bulb.
Since the bulb is rated for a voltage which is much higher than that sup­
plied by the accumulator, it glows weakly when the switch is on, emitting
red light. However, at the moment of disconnection of the circuit, it glows
for a short time very brightly, emitting white light. What causes this effect?
When the switch is off, the current through the coil decreases, i.e. its
magnetic field becomes weaker. Here self-induction is observed, owing to
Chapter 17
which a short-term but quite large emf is induced. This emf causes a large
current lasting for a short time and making the bulb glow brightly.
In order to establish the direction of the current generated in the pro­
cess of self-induction, we must replace the bulb in the experiment shown in
Investigation of the direction of a self-induced current.
to one side for the forward current and to the other side for the backward
current.3 Suppose, for example, that when the switch is closed and the cur­
rent flows in the direction ab through the coil and in the direction dc
through the voltmeter, the pointer of the voltmeter is deflected to the right.
When the circuit is disconnected, it will be seen that the voltmeter pointer is
abruptly deflected to the left, indicating that the current through the
voltmeter passes from c to d. This means that in the closed circuit abcda,
formed by the coil and the voltmeter, the current continues to flow from a
to b.
Thus, when the circuit is disconnected, the current in the coil does not
vanish immediately, but continues to flow in the former direction, at­
tenuating gradually. Since the switch is off, this current is obviously sus­
tained by the emf of self-induction. The same would take place if instead of
switching the current off, we tried to decrease it (say, by increasing the
deviate to the right upon a prolonged passage of current, but can freely move to the left when
the circuit is disconnected. Otherwise, it may appear that the pointer continues its motion to
the right by inertia when the circuit is closed.
resistance R): the decrease of the current occurs at a slow rate due to selfinduction since the induced current flows in the same direction as the
primary current. On the contrary, if the current in the coil increases, the
emf of self-induction opposes the increasing current and slows down its in­
crease. Thus, in accordance with the general rule established in Sec. 15.2,
the current of self-induction is directed so that it opposes the change in the
current causing the induction process.
Let us now consider self-induction from a somewhat different point of
view. What is the source of the energy absorbed by the bulb at the moment
when it glows brightly and converted into heat and light in the bulb? We
know that the flash is observed when the switch is off. Consequently, the
energy cannot be taken from the accumulator. The flash is observed when
the current in the coil, and hence the magnetic Held in it, vanish. Thus, we
arrive at the conclusion that the energy absorbed by the bulb at the moment
of disconnection of the circuit was formerly stored in the form of the
energy of the magnetic field. When we connect the coil to the accumulator,
we produce a magnetic field, which requires a certain amount of energy to
be taken from the accumulator. When we interrupt the current, the
magnetic field ceases and the energy stored in it is converted during the
process of self-induction into the energy of the electric current in the bulb.
value immediately after closing the circuit of the winding?
its winding is abruptly disconnected? This increase can be such that it may cause a
damage in the circuit, and for this reason the current is normally switched off gradually
with the help of a rheostat.
It was shown in Sec. 2.27 that the electric field has an energy equal to
the work which would be done to separate charges and produce this field.
The phenomena associated with self-induction described above clearly
indicate that the magnetic field has a store o f energy. This energy has been
spent for producing a magnetic field. It can be returned when the magnetic
field vanishes.
brighter if we disconnect a circuit with a stronger current? What arrangement of the cir­
cuit makes this effect stronger?
tains two incandescent lamps, and the other a large electromagnet. The current in the two
circuits is the same. Which circuit causes a stronger spark when being disconnected?
Why? Like in any other induction process, the em f o f self-induction in a coil is
proportional to the rate o f variation o f the magnetic flu x through the turns
of the coil (see Sec. 15.4). The magnetic flux is known to be proportional
to the current in the circuit.
If the current in the circuit at a moment tx is /,, the magnetic flux 4>, will
be proportional to iv i.e.
*,=L/„
where L is the proportionality factor, which depends on the number of
turns, the shape and size of the coil, and hence has different values for dif­
ferent coils. Let us suppose that in a certain small time interval at a mo­
ment t2, the current in the circuit becomes i2, and hence the magnetic flux
at this moment is
$2 _ L i2-
Thus, during the time t2 — tx the magnetic flux has changed by 4>2 - ^ =
L (iz - /,). Denoting, as before, the small differences $2 - 4>j, i2 - t, and
t2 ~ h by A4>, Ai and At respectively, we obtain (see Sec. 15.4) the induced
emf with the help of the relation
A4> _ . Ai
~A T ~ L ~ A t
The factor L characterizing the coil is called the inductance o f the coil.
If the coil is such that the change in the current by Ai = 1A during the time
interval At = 1 s causes the induced emf £md = 1 V, the inductance of such
a coil is taken for the unit of inductance. This unit is called the henry (H)
after the American physicist J. Henry (1797-1878). Thus, if the inductance
is measured in henries, the current in amperes and the time in seconds, the
emf of self-induction will be given by formula (17.7.2) in volts. If, for ex­
ample, the inductance of a coil is 5 H and the current in it changes by 1 A
in 0.02 s, the average induced emf is
Calculations and experiments lead to the following formula for the in­
ductance of a very long coil (solenoid):
A^S = w*o — j ~
where ATis the number of turns, S is the cross-sectional area, I is the coil
length and n is the relative permeability of the medium filling the coil.
Thus, the inductance of the coil is the larger, the larger its cross-sectional
area. This is associated with an increase in the magnetic flux through the
coil for the same current in it. If we introduce an iron core into the coil (see
Sec. 16.1), its inductance strongly increases since the relative permeability
of iron is very high.
According to formula (17.7.3), we have
= L[H ]/[m ]
Hence it follows that /*0 can be expressed in henry per metre (H/m) (see
Sec. 12.3). It should be recalled that n and N are dimensionless quantities.
The phenomena of electromagnetic induction, and hence self-induction, are observed not
only in coils but also in conductors of any shape, including straight conductors. Therefore,
every conductor can be characterized by a certain inductance. However, for most conductors
having the shape other than a coil the inductance is so small that the self-induction in such
conductors can be neglected. Only for very rapid variations of the current, when the ratio
Ai/At becomes very large, the emf of self-induction should be taken into account even for
linear conductors.
a change in the current by 0.02 A over 0.01 s?
cross-sectional area?
A rapid variation of the magnitude and direction of an alternating current
is responsible for a number of peculiar properties which distinguish it from
a direct current. Some of these peculiarities are clearly manifested in the
following experiments.
source supplying a voltage of 12 V (accumulator battery) and an a.c.
source producing the same voltage of 12 V. Connecting a small incandes­
cent lamp to each source, we see that the brightness of the glow of the
lamps is the same (Fig. 298a). Let us now connect capacitors having large
capacitances in the two circuits (Fig. 298b). It will be seen that in the d.c.
circuit the lamp does not glow at all, while in the a.c. circuit it glows almost
as brightly as in the absence of the capacitor. The absence of glow in the
d.c. circuit can easily be explained: there is an insulating layer between the
capacitor plates so that the circuit is disconnected. On the other hand, the
fact that the lamp glows in the a.c. circuit appears strange.
\.i.*
Passage of an alternating current through a capacitor: (a) the lamps in a d.c. (right) and an
a.c. (left) circuits glow identically; (b) when a capacitor of capacitance C is connected to each
of the circuits, the direct current ceases, while the alternating current continues to flow and
heats the lamp filament.
If, however, we give a thought to it, there is nothing misterious at all.
We are just dealing with a fast repetition of the familiar process of charg­
ing and discharging a capacitor. When we connect (Fig. 299a) a capacitor
The lamp flashes during each recharging of the capacitor: (a) charging of the capacitor (the
key in the left position) and its discharging through the lamp (the key in the right position);
to a current source (by turning the key to the left), the current flows
through the wires until the charges accumulated on the capacitor plates
create the potential difference balancing the voltage of the source. In this
process, the electric field produced in the capacitor accumulates a certain
energy. If we connect the plates of the charged capacitor by a conductor,
having disconnected it from the current source (by turning the key to the
right), the charge will flow from one plate to the other, and a short-term
current will flow in the circuit containing the lamp. The field in the
capacitor will soon disappear, and the energy stored in it will be converted
into heat liberated in the lamp.
The processes associated with the passage of an alternating current
through a capacitor are visually illustrated by the experiment shown in
current source so that plate 1 acquires a positive charge and plate 2 a
disconnected, the capacitor discharges through the lamp. As we turn the
key to the left, the capacitor is charged again, but now plate 1 is charged
position to the left one and back, it will be seen that the lamp glows for a
moment at each change of the contact, i.e. short-term current passes
through it. If we switch the key sufficiently fast, the flashes of the lamp
follow one another so rapidly that it will glow continuously. The current
passing through the lamp in this case frequently changes its direction. The
electric field in the capacitor changes all the time: it is first created, then
vanishes, created again in the opposite direction, and so on. The same oc­
curs when we connect a capacitor to an a.c. circuit (Fig. 299c).
the capacitor in the circuit shown in Fig. 2986 by a coil made of copper
wire, having a large number of turns and an iron core in it (Fig. 300). Such
A lamp is connected to a d.c. (a) and an a.c. (b) circuit in series with a coil. The lamp glows
brightly in the d.c. circuit and less brightly in the a.c. circuit.
coils are known to have a large inductance (see Sec. 16.1). On the other
hand, the resistance offered by such a coil to a direct current is low since it
is made of a thick wire. In the d.c. circuit, the lamp glows very brightly
experiment with the direct current is quite clear: since the resistance of the
coil is small, its presence almost does not affect the current, and the lamp
Chapter 17
glows brightly. Why does the coil weaken the alternating current? We shall
gradually draw the iron core out of the coil. The lamp will be seen to glow
more and more bright, i.e. as we draw the core out, the current in the cir­
cuit increases. When the core is removed completely, the glow of the lamp
may become almost the same as in the d.c. circuit, if the number of turns in
the coil is not very large. But the removal of the core decreases the induc­
tance of the coil. Thus, a coil having a low resistance but large inductance
and connected to an a.c. circuit may considerably weaken the current.
The effect of a large-inductance coil on an alternating current can easily
be explained. An alternating current is a rapidly varying current whose
magnitude now increases and then decreases. But these variations of cur­
rent induce in the circuit an emf of self-induction whose value depends on
the inductance of the circuit. The direction of the emf of self-induction (as
was shown in Sec. 15.2) is such that it opposes the variation of current, i.e.
it decreases the amplitude of the current, and hence its effective value. As
long as the inductance of wires is small, this additional emf is also small
and its effect is negligible. However, in the presence of a large inductance
this additional emf may considerably affect the magnitude of the alter­
Inductive Reactances
In Sec. 3.8, the basic law of direct current, viz. Ohm’s law I = U /R, was
established.
The current I in a conductor is proportional to the voltage U across its
ends, i.e. the ratio U /I retains a constant value (does not depend on U or
/). This law remains in force for alternating currents as well. In this case
too, a two-, three-, four-, ... fold increase in the voltage between two
points of a circuit leads to an increase in the current in the same propor­
tion.
In contrast to a direct current, the ratio U /I (where U and / are the ef­
fective values of the current and voltage) will be called the impedance of a
conductor and denoted by Z. Thus, Z = U/I. We shall write Ohm’s law
for an alternating current in the form
Y > U7.9.1)
where Z is a quantity constant for a given conductor and independent of I
or U.
It was shown in the previous section that the magnitude of an alter­
offerred by a given conductor to a direct current but also by the presence of
capacitors or inductance coils in a circuit. Generally, the quantities R and Z
are different, i.e. the same circuit opposes differently the passage o f direct
and alternating currents.
Let us clarify this statement with the help of the following example. If
we connect a capacitor to a d.c. circuit, the circuit will be disconnected, the
current in it will be equal to zero, and hence the resistance of the circuit will
be infinitely large: R = oo. Let us now connect in series a capacitor, say, of
current of 0.69 A in the circuit. Consequently, the impedance of the circuit
due to the capacitance of a capacitor is
Let us consider another example. Suppose that an inductance coil is
formed by 1000 turns of copper wire having a diameter of 0.4 mm and
wound on a cylindrical iron core having a diameter of 10 cm and 50 cm
long. The inductance of this coil is L = 2.5 H. It can easily be calculated
that the length of the wire in the winding is 314 m and its resistance R to a
direct current is 38 Q (see Table 2, Sec. 3.9). Therefore, if we connect the
coil to a d.c. circuit at a voltage of 220 V, the current in it will be / =
meter to an a.c. circuit at a voltage of 220 V, the current through it will be
only 0.279 A. Thus, the impedance of the coil offered to a current with a
frequency of 50 Hz is
The resistance R offered by this circuit to a direct current is sometimes
called the d.c. resistance. The resistance offered to an alternating current
by a capacitor (capacitance) or a coil (inductance) is called the reactance
X L).
The capacitive reactance of a capacitor is the lower the larger its
capacitance and the higher the frequency of the alternating current, i.e. the
shorter the period. Indeed, the larger the capacitance of the capacitor, the
larger electric charge is accumulated on its plates during charging, and the
higher the frequency (the shorter the period), the shorter the time during
which this charge will pass through the wires, i.e. the larger the average
current through the capacitor. Thus, as C and co increase, the current
becomes stronger and the reactance lower.
Experiments and calculations show that for a sinusoidal alternating
current,
x c = a)C
current frequency of 50 Hz. The voltage in the circuit is 220 V. What is the current
through the capacitor?
The inductive reactance of a coil, on the contrary, increases with the
current frequency and the inductance of the coil. Indeed, the emf of selfinduction, which reduces the current in the circuit, is equal to LAi/At. The
higher the frequency of the current, the faster its variations occur, and the
greater the ratio Ai/At. Thus, as the frequency of the current and the in­
ductance of the coil increase, the induced emf opposing the variations of
the primary field increases. The current thus decreases, i.e. resistance of
the circuit to the alternating current becomes higher.
Experiments and theory give the following relation for a sinusoidal
alternating current:
X L = wL.
*} 17.9.2. What will be the current through a coil having an inductance of 4 H and con• nected to an a.c. circuit at a voltage U = 220 V and a frequency v = 50 Hz?
The impedance Z of an a.c. circuit containing resistance R and an in­
ductive reactance XL (or a capacitive reactance X c , or both) is determined
by these quantities but is generally not equal to their sum 4.
Elements in an A. C. Circuit
Let us compile an a.c. circuit formed by two parallel branches containing
resistances R ' and R " and ammeters A x and A 2 which measure currents /,
and I2 in these branches (Fig. 301). The third ammeter A measures the cur­
rent in the unbranched circuit. Suppose first that resistances R ' and R " are
incandescent lamps or rheostats whose inductive reactances can be
direct current, we shall see that the reading of the ammeter A is equal to the
Z = 'J R 2 + (XL - X c )2.
sum of the readings of the ammeters A x and A 2, i.e. I = /, + /2. If the
resistances R ' and R " are rheostats, then varying their resistances we can
arbitrarily change each current /, and J2, but the equality J = /, + /2 will
always be observed. The same will happen if we replace the two rheostats
by capacitors, i.e. if we have two capacitive reactances (Fig. 301b), or if we
have two inductive reactances, i.e. replace the rheostats by coils with iron
cores, whose inductive reactances are much higher than the resistances so
that the latter can be neglected (Fig. 301c).
Elements in the parallel branches
of an a.c. circuit are of the same
Elements in the parallel branches
of an a.c. circuit differ in nature,
Thus, i f parallel branches have the same sort o f components, the cur­
rent in the unbranched circuit is equal to the sum o f the currents in the
branches. Of course, this is also true when there is any number of branches
instead of two.
Let us now replace the resistance in one branch (Fig. 302a and b) by
capacitive reactance (a capacitor) or by an inductive reactance (a coil hav­
ing a large inductance and a small resistance). In this case, the result of the
experiment seems strange at first sight: the current / in the unbranched cir-
Chapter 17
cuit turns out to be smaller than the sum of the currents in the branches:
I < I x + /2. If, for example, the current in one branch is 3 A and in the
other branch 4 A, the ammeter of the unbranched circuit will indicate not
the current of 7 A, as it could be expected, but only 5, or 3, or 2 A. The
current / is smaller than the sum of the currents I x and /2 in the branches
when one branch has a capacitive reactance and the other branch contains
an inductive reactance.
Thus, if parallel branches have different kinds o f components, the cur­
rent in the unbranched circuit is smaller than the sum o f the currents in
separate branches.
In order to understand these phenomena, we replace the ammeters by
oscillographs in the circuits shown in Figs. 301 and 302 and register the
form of the current in each of parallel branches.5 It turns out that the cur­
rents of different origin do not coincide in phase either with each other or
with the current in the unbranched curcuit. In particular, the current in the
branch with a resistance leads in phase the current in the branch with a
capacitive reactance by a quarter o f a period and lags in phase behind the
current in the branch with an inductive reactance also by a quarter o f a
period.
In this case, the curves representing the form of the current in the un­
branched circuit and in any of the branches are arranged relative to each
other like curves 1 and 2 in Fig. 294. In the general case, the phase shift
between the current in each branch and the unbranched current may
assume any value between zero and ± tt/2 depending on the relation be­
tween the resistance and the capacitive (inductive) reactance of the branch.
Consequently, in a circuit with different types o f components, the phase
shift between the currents in parallel branches o f a circuit may have any
value between zero and ± ir.
This phase difference for the currents in parallel branches with dif­
ferent kinds of components is responsible for the phenomena mentioned at
the beginning of this section. Indeed, for the instantaneous values of cur­
rents, i.e. for the values the currents have at the same instant of time, a
well-known rule is observed:
/ = ij 4- i2.
However, for the amplitude (effective) values of these currents this rule is
violated since, as a result of summation of two sinusoidal currents or other
quantities varying in accordance with the sine law, the result of summation
depends on the phase shift between the quantities being added.6
two loops (see Sec. 17.3). One of the loops is connected into the circuit with current /, while
the other into the circuit with current Ix or /2.
Indeed, let us suppose, for simplicity, that the amplitudes of the cur­
rents being added are equal, and the phase shift between them is zero. Then
the instantaneous value of the sum of these currents will just be equal to the
doubled value of one of the addends, i.e. the resultant current will have the
form of a sinusoid with the same period and phase but with the doubled
amplitude. If the amplitudes of the currents being added are different
equal to the sum of the amplitudes of the currents being added. The same
happens when the phase shift between the currents is zero, say, when the
components in both parallel branches are of the same type.
Summation of two sinusoidal alternating currents. The currents to be added (<a) coincide in
phase (<
p= 0); (b) are in the opposite phases, i.e. shifted in time by half a period (<p = i t ); (c)
are shifted in time by a quarter of a period
= ir/2).
Let us now consider the other extreme case when the currents being
added have equal amplitudes but are in opposite phases, i.e. the phase shift
between them is equal to it. Here, the instantaneous values of the currents
being added are equal in magnitude but have different signs. Therefore,
their algebraic sum will always be equal to zero. Thus, when the phase shift
between the currents in two branches is equal to ir, there will be no current
in the unbranched circuit despite the presence of the currents in each of the
parallel branches. If the amplitudes of the currents shifted by it are dif­
ferent, we shall obtain the resultant current of the same frequency, but its
Chapter 17
amplitude will be equal to the difference in the amplitudes of the currents
being added. The phase of this current will be the same as that of the cur­
rent with the larger amplitude (Fig. 303b). This case can be practically
realized in a circuit with an inductive reactance in one branch and with a
capacitive reactance in the other.
In the general case, when two sinusoidal currents of the same frequency
and with a phase shift are added, we always obtain a sinusoidal current of
the same frequency and with an amplitude which has an intermediate value
between the difference of the amplitudes of the currents being added and
their sum, depending on the phase shift <f>. By way of example, Fig. 303c
shows a graphic summation of two currents with the phase shift <p = t/2 .
Using a pair of compasses, we can easily verify that each ordinate / of the
resultant curve is indeed the algebraic sum of the ordinates i, and i2 of the
curves, corresponding to the same abscissa, i.e. to the same instant of time.
Elements of an A.C. Circuit
Let us connect in series a resistance R and an inductive reactance XL to an
a.c. circuit and then connect in parallel to them two voltmeters measuring
the voltages across their ends. The voltmeter K, measures the voltage Uab
between points a and b, while the voltmeter V2 measures the voltage
between points b and c. The third voltmeter V3 measures the voltage l/ac
between points a and c (Fig. 304).
The sum of the voltages on a resistance and inductive (or capacitive) reactance is not equal to
the voltage between points a and c of the circuit containing these elements.
Experiments show that when the two components are of the same type,
i.e. they both are resistances, or capacitive reactances (inductive reac­
tances), the voltage across the segment ac is, as in the case of a direct cur­
rent, equal to the sum of the voltages across the segments ab and be:
Vac = v ab + t/* .
In the general case, however, when the components are of different
types (Fig. 304), the voltage across the entire segment ac will always be
smaller than the sum of the voltages across the segments ab and be:
Uac < Uab + Ufc.
If, for example, we connect in series to a circuit at a voltage of 220 V a
lamp having a resistance of 60 Q and a coil having an inductive reactance
of 80 0, the voltage across the lamp will be found to be 125 V, while the
voltage across the coil will be 166 V. The sum Uab +
is 291 V, although
Uac = 220 V.
The reason behind this is the same phase shift between the voltages Uab
and (Jfc as that observed for the currents in parallel branches of the circuit
. do not coincide in phase. If the first element has a resistance and the second
element a capacitive reactance, the voltage Uab leads in phase the voltage
Ufo by a quarter of a period, and if the second element has an inductive
reactance, the voltage Uab lags in phase behind the voltage Ubc by the same
value. The curves representing the form of the voltages Uab and Ubc will be
arranged in this case as the corresponding curves in Fig. 303c.
For the instantaneous values of voltages, we always have
u = «, + u2,
but the result of summation of two sinusoidal voltages, i.e. the amplitude
and phase of the resultant voltage, will depend on the phase shift of the
voltages being added in the same way as for currents.
Let us make the following experiment. We connect a two-loop oscillograph
described in Sec. 17.3 to an a.c. circuit so that loop 1 (Fig. 305a) is con­
capacitor. Obviously, the curve obtained for loop 1 represents the form of
the current through the capacitor, while that obtained for loop 2 gives the
form of the voltage between the plates of the capacitor (points a and b)
since the current in this loop of the oscillograph is proportional to the
voltage at each instant of time. Experiments show that in this case the
curves representing the current and the voltage are shifted in phase so that
the current leads the voltage by a quarter of a period (by x/2). If we replace
the capacitor by a coil having a large inductance (Fig. 305b), it will turn
out that the current lags behind the voltage in phase by a quarter of a
period (by x/2). Finally, we can show in the same way that for a resistor
the voltage and current coincide in phase (Fig. 305c).
Chapter 17
Experiment on detecting phase shift between current and voltage: schematic diagram of the
experiment (left) and the obtained results (right).
In the general case, when a circuit contains a resistance and reactances
to the current, the phase shift lying between + ir/2 and —ir/2 and being
determined by the relation between the resistance and the reactances o f the
given circuit. 7
What is the physical cause of the observed phase shift between the cur­
rent and voltage?
tan tp =
_ o)L — \/tj)C
If a circuit does not contain capacitors and coils, i.e. when its capacitive
and inductive reactances can be neglected in comparison with the
resistance, the current follows the voltage, passing simultaneously with the
voltage through the maximum and zero values as shown in Fig. 305c.
If the inductance/, of the circuit is significant, the passage of an alter­
variations of the magnetic field (and hence the variations of the current
producing this field) which induce the emf. As the current increases, the
emf of self-induction opposes this increase, and for this reason the current
attains its maximum value later than in the absence of self-induction. As
the current decreases, the emf of self-induction tends to sustain the current,
and the current decreases to zero later than in the absence of self-induction.
Thus, in the presence of inductance the current lags in phase behind the
current which would be in the absence of inductance, i.e. lags in phase
behind its voltage.
If the resistance R of the circuit can be neglected in comparison with its
inductive reactance XL = «L, the time shift between the current and
voltage is 7V4 (the phase shift is ir/2), i.e. the maximum of u coincides with
i = 0 as in Fig. 305b. Indeed, in this case the voltage across the resistance is
Ri = 0 since R = 0, and hence the entire external voltage u is balanced by
the induced emf which has the opposite direction: u = LAi/At. Thus, the
maximum of u coincides with the maximum of Ai/At, i.e. is attained at the
moment when i changes most rapidly (when < = 0). On the contrary, when /
passes through its maximum value, the change in the current is minimum
If the resistance R of a circuit is not so small that it can be neglected, a part of the external
voltage u drops on the resistor R , while the remaining part is balanced by the emf of selfinduction: u = Ri + LAi/At. In this case, the maximum of / is displaced relative to the max­
imum of u along the time axis by an interval smaller than 774 (the phase shift is smaller than
*72). This situation is represented in Fig. 306. Calculations show that in this case the phase
shift <p can be computed by the formula
X, ccL tan <p = - L = ----- .
For R =
we have tan <p =
oo and tp =
*72 as in the case considered earlier.
If a circuit contains a capacitor of capacitance C, and the resistance can
be neglected, the capacitor plates connected to a current source of voltage u
are charged, and a voltage uc appears between them. The voltage uc across
the capacitor follows the voltage of the current source u almost instan24— 7185
Chapter 17
Phase shift between current and voltage in an RL circuit.
taneously,8 i.e. it attains its maximum simultaneously with u and vanishes
when u = 0.
The dependence between the current / and voltage u in this case is
shown in Fig. 307a. Figure 3076 schematically shows the process of
recharging of the capacitor due to alternating current in the circuit.
/, u Process of the capacitor recharging in an a.c. circuit.
huge velocity c = 3 x 108 m/s (velocity of light). Since the length of the circuit from the cur­
rent source to the capacitor plates is not large, the voltage uc across the capacitor may lag
behind u only by a negligible fraction of a second, i.e. it practically follows u without any time
lag. When the capacitor is charged to the maximum value (i.e. uc , and
hence u, attain their maximum values), the current r = 0, and the total
energy of the circuit is equal to the energy of the charged capacitor (point a
in Fig. 307a). As the voltage u decreases, the capacitor starts to discharge,
and a current appears in the circuit. This current is directed from plate 1 to
plate 2, i.e. against the voltage u. For this reason, this current is presented
in Fig. 307a as negative (the points of the curve lie below the time axis). By
the moment t = 774, the capacitor has been discharged completely (uc =
electric energy is equal to zero, and the total energy is equal to the magnetic
energy of the field produced by the current. Further, the voltage u changes
sign and the current decreases, retaining the previous direction. When u
the current / = 0 (point c). Then u (and uc ) starts to decrease, the
capacitor is discharged, and the current increases, now flowing from plate
value at the moment when u = 0 (point d), and so on. Figure 307a shows
that the current attains its maximum and passes through zero earlier than
voltage does, i.e. the current leads the voltage in phase.
If the resistance of the circuit cannot be neglected in comparison with the capacitive reac­
tance X c - 1/wC, the current leads the voltage by a period of time shorter than 774 (the
Phase shift between current and voltage in an RC circuit.
phase shift is less than x/2, Fig. 308). Calculations show that in this case the phase shift <pcan
be determined from the formula
Xr l/(w C )
tan (p = — = ---------R
For R = 0, we have tan ip = oo and <p = t / 2 as in the case considered earlier.
Chapter 17
In Sec. 4.3, we considered the power of a direct current. It was shown that
if the voltage across the conductor is U and the current in it is /, the power
developed by the current in this conductor is
P = IU = I 2R t
where R is the conductor resistance.
For an alternating current, the situation is more complicated since the
magnitude of the alternating current is determined not only by the
resistance R of the circuit but also by its inductive or capacitive reactances.
Let us suppose, for example, that a subcircuit contains only a capacitive
reactance, i.e. includes only a capacitor. It was shown in Sec. 17.8 that,
when an alternating current passes through a capacitor, multiple charging
and discharging of this capacitor takes place. During the quarter of a
period when the capacitor is being charged, the current source spends a cer­
tain amount of energy which is stored in the capacitor in the form of the
energy of its electric field. But during the next quarter of a period, the
capacitor is being discharged and gives away to the curcuit practically the
entire energy stored in it. Thus, if we neglect the energy losses on heating
the dielectric in the capacitor (which are usually small), we can state that
the passage o f current through a capacitor does not involve liberation o f
power in it.
The same will be the case when an alternating current passes through a
coil whose resistance can be neglected. During the quarter of a period when
the current increases, a magnetic field is produced in the coil, which has a
certain store of energy. The creation of this field requires a certain amount
of energy from the source. But in the next quarter of a period, when the
current decreases, the magnetic field vanishes, and the energy stored in it is
returned to the source in the process of self-induction.
Thus, the presence o f capacitive or inductive reactance in a circuit,
which affects the current in it, does not involve the liberation o f power in
the circuit. In capacitors and inductance coils, the energy is now “borrow­
ed” from the source and then is returned to it, but it does not leave the cir­
cuit and is not spent on heating wires (Joule’s heat, see Sec. 4.1) or on doing a mechanical work.

In practical applications of alternating current, it is often necessary to alter
the voltage supplied by a generator. In some cases, a voltage of thousand
or million volts is required, while in other cases a low voltage of a few volts
is sufficient. It would be very difficult to carry out such transformations
for a direct current, but an a.c. voltage can be transformed (increased or
decreased) quite easily almost without any loss o f energy. This is the main
reason behind the utilization of alternating and not direct current in the
overwhelming majority of cases.
Chapter 17
Devices with the help of which the a.c. voltage is transformed are
known as transformers. A schematic diagram of a transformer is shown in
The ends of one winding are connected to an a.c. source, say, the mains
with a voltage Uv The loads, viz. devices consuming electric power, are
connected to the ends of the second winding in which an alternating voltage
U2 differing from Ux is created. The winding connected to a current source
is known as the primary, while the winding connected to the load is called
the secondary. If the voltage across the primary (the voltage of the source)
is higher than the voltage across the secondary, i.e. Ul > U2, we have a
step-down transformer. If on the contrary Ux < U2, we have a step-up
transformer.
When a transformer is connected to an a.c. source, say, to the mains,
the alternating current in the primary produces an alternating magnetic
Held one of whose lines is shown in Fig. 309 by the dashed curve. Since the
Mains
Load S c h e m a tic d ia g r a m o f a tr a n s f o r m e r .
two windings have a common iron core, almost all the lines of this
magnetic field pass through the windings. In other words, the two windings
are pierced by the same magnetic flux. The same emf is induced in each
turn of the windings (both primary and secondary) when this magnetic flux
changes. The total emf induced in each winding is equal to the product
of the emf e induced in a turn and the number N of turns in the cor­
responding winding. If the primary contains N x turns and the secondary
has N 2 turns, the emf’s induced in them are <£[ = eNx and <S“
tively, i.e.
*2 In the so-called no-load operation of a transformer, i.e. when no load is
connected to the secondary winding and there is no current in it, the
voltage U2 between the ends of the secondary is equal to the emf (?2 induced
in it (see Sec. 6.8). As to the emf
induced in the primary, according to
Lenz’s law (see Sec. 1S.2) it always opposes the external voltage (/, applied
to the primary, and for no-load operation it is almost equal to £/,.
I n d e e d , it w a s m e n tio n e d e a r lie r (se e S e c . 1 7 .1 2 ) t h a t t h e v o lta g e o f a s u b c irc u it c o n ta in ­
in g a r e s is ta n c e R a n d a n in d u c ta n c e L is
A/ = R I + L ------.
At B u t in n o - lo a d o p e r a tio n o f a tr a n s f o r m e r , its in d u c ta n c e L is s o la r g e t h a t t h e re s is ta n c e R c a n
b e n e g le c te d in c o m p a r is o n w ith th e in d u c tiv e r e a c ta n c e , i.e . w e c a n a s s u m e t h a t R = 0 . T h e n
At Thus, the ratio o f the voltages across the terminals o f the windings fo r the
the em f‘s induced in them:
u2 <f2 This ratio is known as the transformation ratio and is denoted by K :
N2 U2 If, for example, the primary contains 2500 turns and the secondary 250
turns, the transformation factor is equal to 10. Connecting the primary to a
source supplying the voltage Ux = 1000 V, we obtain the voltage U2 =
smaller number of turns as the primary and the voltage supplied to it was
voltage U2 = 1000 V across the ends of the secondary winding. In the
former case, we have a step-down transformer, and in the latter case, a
step-up transformer.
w in d in g s w ith t h e n u m b e r o f t u r n s 2 5 0 , 5 0 0 ,1 5 0 0 a n d 10 0 0 0 a r e f itte d o n th e s a m e c o r e .
W h a t w ill b e th e v o lta g e s b e tw e e n t h e e n d s o f e a c h s e c o n d a r y w in d in g i f a v o lta g e o f
a n ir o n c o r e a n d h a v in g a n u m b e r o f t a p s f ro m s o m e p o in ts o f th e w in d in g s e p a r a te d b y a
c e r ta in n u m b e r o f tu r n s . S u p p o s e t h a t th e r e a r e 100 t u r n s b e tw e e n te r m in a ls 1 a n d 2 , 2 0 0
t u r n s b e tw e e n 2 a n d 5 , 3 0 0 t u r n s b e tw e e n 3 a n d 4 a n d 4 0 0 tu r n s b e tw e e n 4 a n d 5 . A
v o lta g e o f 2 2 0 V is a p p lie d a c r o s s te r m in a ls 1 a n d 3. W h a t w ill b e th e v o lta g e b e tw e e n 1
and 2, 1 and 4 , 1 and 5, 2 and 3, 2 and 4, 2 and 5, 3 and 4, 3 and 5 and 4 and 5?
Chapter 17
T o E x e rc is e 1 7 .1 4 .2 .
L e t u s n o w c o n s id e r th e o p e r a tio n o f a tr a n s f o r m e r in a g r e a te r d e ta il. W ith a n o p e n
s e c o n d a r y , w h e n th e r e is n o c u r re n t in it, a n d h e n c e th e p o w e r is n o t s p e n t, th e v o lta g e in th e
p r im a ry is e q u a l t o th e d if fe r e n c e b e tw e e n t h e a p p lie d v o lta g e Uxa n d t h e in d u c e d e m f <?xo p ­
p o s in g it. T h e v o lta g e Ux - £x p r o d u c e s a c e r ta in n o - lo a d c u r r e n t IQin th e p r im a r y , w h o s e
p o w e r is a u se le ss lo ss : it is s p e n t o n h e a tin g th e w in d in g b y th e c u r r e n t p a s s in g th r o u g h it
tio n r e v e rs a l ( iro n c o r e lo ss ). I f , h o w e v e r, t h e tr a n s f o r m e r is d e s ig n e d c o r re c tly , th e s e lo sses
a r e s m a ll, a n d th e n o - lo a d c u r r e n t c o n s titu te s a fe w p e r c e n t o f t h e c u r r e n t in th e p r im a ry w ith
a fu ll lo a d a p p lie d to t h e t r a n s f o r m e r , i.e . w ith th e lo a d f o r w h ic h it is d e s ig n e d .
W h e n a lo a d is c o n n e c te d t o th e s e c o n d a r y w in d in g , a c u r r e n t I2 p a s se s t h r o u g h its c irc u it
a n d th e c o r r e s p o n d in g p o w e r is d e v e lo p e d . T h e v o lta g e U2 b e tw e e n th e te r m in a ls o f th e s e c o n ­
d a r y is n o lo n g e r e q u a l e x a c tly t o &2 b u t w ill b e s o m e w h a t lo w e r. I f , h o w e v e r, th e lo a d d o e s
v o lta g e ). T h is o b v io u s ly w ill le a d t o a n in c re a s e o f c u r r e n t Ix in th e p r im a r y , a n d h e n c e th e
p o w e r c o n s u m e d b y th e t r a n s f o r m e r f ro m th e m a in s . T h e la rg e r th e lo a d o f th e s e c o n d a r y
A s te p -d o w n tr a n s f o r m e r p r o d u c in g a v e ry la rg e
c u r r e n t.
Transformers are designed so that with a normal load, when we can
the currents in the primary and secondary are almost inversely propor­
tional to the corresponding voltages:
u2 Therefore, if the voltage U2 is much smaller than (/,, very strong currents
can be obtained in the secondary of such a step-down transformer.
Transformers of this type are used in electric welding. Figure 311 shows, by
way of example, a step-down transformer with a secondary formed by a
single turn. The voltage U2 of this transformer is very low, but the current
in the secondary is so strong that it heats a thick copper rod to the red-hot
state.
its te r m in a ls is 2 4 0 0 V . W h a t is t h e c u r r e n t in th e p r im a r y i f th e in p u t v o lta g e is 2 2 0 V ?
A s w a s m e n tio n e d e a r lie r, th e n o - lo a d c u r r e n t IQo f a tr a n s f o r m e r is v e ry w e a k . T h is
m e a n s t h a t t h e r e s is ta n c e o f th e p r im a r y w in d in g is v e ry h ig h . T h is re s is ta n c e is a lm o s t c o m ­
p le te ly d u e t o a la rg e in d u c ta n c e o f th e p r im a r y w in d in g in t h e u n lo a d e d t r a n s f o r m e r . Its
r e s is ta n c e R c a n b e n e g le c te d in c o m p a r is o n w ith th e in d u c tiv e r e a c ta n c e w L. W h e n w e c o n ­
m a g n e tic fie ld in t h e c o r e a n d in d u c e s in t h e p r im a r y a c e r ta in a d d itio n a l e m f w h ic h , a c c o r ­
d in g t o L e n z ’s la w , is d ir e c te d a g a in s t (fv i.e . re d u c e s it. T h e n t h e v o lta g e Ux - ^ in th e
p r im a r y in c r e a s e s , a n d h e n c e t h e c u r r e n t Ix t h r o u g h th is w in d in g in c re a s e s a s w ell.
I t c a n b e s ta te d t h a t th e e f fe c t o f t h e m a g n e tic fie ld p r o d u c e d b y th e c u r r e n t / 2 in th e
s e c o n d a r y re d u c e s th e in d u c tiv e r e a c ta n c e o f th e p r im a r y , w h ic h le a d s t o a n in c re a s e in th e
c u r r e n t p a s s in g th r o u g h it.
T h u s , a n o - lo a d ( o r s m a ll lo a d ) tr a n s f o r m e r o p e r a tio n o f f e r s a lm o s t p u r e ly in d u c tiv e
r e a c ta n c e t o t h e c u r r e n t in th e m a in s , i.e . th e p o w e r f a c to r (c o s <p) is v e ry s m a ll. A s th e lo a d
in c r e a s e s , t h e p o w e r f a c to r in c re a s e s a n d b e c o m e s c lo s e t o u n ity w h e n t h e tr a n s f o r m e r is fu lly
lo a d e d t o t h e p o w e r f o r w h ic h it h a s b e e n d e s ig n e d . T h e r e f o r e , in o r d e r t o im p ro v e th e t o ta l
p o w e r f a c to r o f a c ir c u it, it is v e ry im p o r ta n t t o d is tr ib u te th e lo a d a m o n g d if f e r e n t
t r a n s f o r m e r s s o a s t o lo a d th e m c o m p le te ly , w ith o u t le a v in g n o - lo a d tr a n s f o r m e r s a s w ell a s
th o s e w ith a s m a ll lo a d in th e p r im a r y c ir c u it.
Thus, a transformer is an apparatus transferring energy from the circuit
of the primary to the secondary. This transfer inevitably involves some
losses (viz. the energy lost on heating the windings, on Foucault currents
and on the magnetization reversal in the iron core). The efficiency o f a
transformer is the ratio o f the power consumed in the secondary circuit to
the power taken from the mains. The difference between these quantities
constitutes useless losses.
In order to reduce energy losses due to the heating of cores by Foucault
currents, the cores are built up from insulated steel laminations stacked
together (see Sec. 15.6), and to reduce losses due to the heating of cores
caused by magnetization reversal the cores are made of special grades of
steel characterized by small losses. As a result, compared with the power
transformed, the transformer losses are usually quite small and the effi­
ciency of transformers is very high. It attains 98-99% for large
transformers and about 95% for small ones.
Chapter 17
A lo w -p o w e r t r a n s f o r m e r . A m a tc h b o x is sh o w n
o n th e rig h t f o r c o m p a r is o n .
Low-power transformers (tens of watts) which are mainly used in
laboratories and for domestic purposes are very small in size (Fig. 312). Big
high-power transformers operating with hundreds and thousands of
kilowatts are huge constructions. They are usually placed in a steel tank
filled with a special mineral oil (Fig. 313). The oil improves the cooling
conditions and serves as an insulating material. The terminals of the
transformer windings are brought out to the upper cover of the tank
through stacked insulators.
A h ig h -p o w e r t r a n s f o r m e r w ith o il c o o lin g .
The transformer was invented in 1876 by the Russian scientist P.N .
Yablochkov who used it for feeding his 'candles* which required various
voltages.
Electric Power
By 1870, the electric current generators (which will be considered in the
transform the heat energy produced by heat engine or the energy of falling
water into the electric energy on the scale that could not be dreamed of
before.
However, the possibility of obtaining the electric energy in large
amounts posed another very important and fundamentally new problem in
engineering, viz. that of energy transfer from one place to another. This
problem could not emerge before the current generators have been in­
vented since it seemed completely unsolvable. Indeed, if we have a water or
wind engine at out disposal, its energy can be transmitted only to a lathe in
an immediate proximity from the engine. This transmission could easily be
realized over a distance of a few tens (or at most hundreds) of metres with
the help of shafts, gears, belt transmissions and so on, but it could not be
imagined that these devices can be used for energy transfer over a few
kilometres.
On the other hand, the electric energy can be transmitted through wires
over a few thousand kilometres. Therefore, as soon as the first satisfactory
models of electric generators were created, the problem of centralized pro­
duction of electric energy and its transmission through wires over large
distances became urgent. Such a formulation of the problem, viz. the pro­
duction of energy at one place and its consumption at another place, is a
distinctive feature of power engineering based on the utilization of electric
energy.
In these conditions, the problem of reduction of energy losses in wires
to the lowest possible value (see Sec. 3.14) becomes of utmost importance.
The decisive step in this direction was made in electrical engineering when it
was found that losses of power can be considerably reduced by increasing
the voltage of the current being transmitted. This conclusion was drawn for
the first time by the Russian electrical engineer D.A. Lachinov who
published the result of his investigations in 1880. The same result was ob­
tained by the French scientist M. Deprez who carried out in 1882 the first
electric energy transmission through telegraph wires over a distance of
For a better understanding of the idea put forth by Lachinov and
Deprez, let us consider a numerical example. Let us suppose that we have
to transmit the power of 1000 kW produced by a generator over a certain
distance. We shall compare the losses associated with energy transmission
in two cases: when the voltage supplied by the generator is 5 and 50 kV. In
Chapter 17
the former case, the current produced by the generator is 200 A (since
Suppose that the transmission line is made of a wire whose resistance is
loss of power on heating is given by P R [W]. Consequently, in the former
case this loss constitutes 2002 x 20 W = 800 kW, while in the latter case
constitute 800 from 1000 kW, i.e. reach 80%, while in the latter case only
by a factor of 100. This is the reason behind the tendency in modern elec­
trical engineering to transmit the energy generated at power plants to
remote regions at as high a voltage as possible.
Naturally, useless losses could be reduced by decreasing R, viz. the
resistance of wires. But for this purpose the wires should be made too thick
since the wire length is determined by the distance from the user. A con­
siderable increase in the cross section of the wire is obviously associated
with an increase in its cost and is hence inexpedient. On the contrary, the
use of high voltages makes it possible to take thin wires which have higher
resistance and are much cheaper.
However, it is difficult to construct generators designed for thousand
volts if only because the insulation of such machines cannot withstand such
a high voltage. Besides, a high voltage cannot be supplied to a consumer.
The only possible way out of this situation is to increase the voltage
produced by generators at a power plant, transmit the energy at a high
voltage to the place where it is to be consumed and there reduce the voltage
to the required values. It is extremely difficult to transform the voltage in
such a way for the direct current. On the other hand, for alternating cur­
rents this transformation can be made quite easily with a very small energy
loss.
High-power electric plants generate electric energy at an alternating
voltage of 6-20 kV and a frequency of 50 Hz. This energy is supplied to
step-up transformers and is transmitted through transmission lines at a
voltage of hundreds of kilovolts to the sites where consumers are located.
Here the current is first received by the main step-down substation where
the voltage is reduced normally to 35 kV. At this voltage the current gets to
a regional distribution system which connects the main step-down substa­
tion with the consumption sites. At every such site, secondary step-down
substations with transformers reducing the voltage to 3, 6 or 10 kV are
located. Then the current is supplied through the wires of a local distribu­
tion system to a large number of transformer units located at individual
plants or supplying current to a small group of buildings or one large
building. Here the voltage is reduced to 127, 220 or 380 V, and at such a
low voltage the energy is supplied to individual flats, lathes, and so on
through the so-called internal system. The schematic diagram of current
distribution, typical for the USSR, is shown in Fig. 314.
Transmission of current from a power plant to users and its distribution among them.
At present, the electric energy is transmitted almost exclusively in the
form of high-voltage alternating current. Calculations show, however, that
its transmission in the form of a high-voltage direct current would be much
more expedient since it would require the wires with the cross-sectional
area (and hence mass) amounting to 2/3 of the corresponding value for the
alternating current. This is very significant for long-distance transmission
lines (extending to thousands of kilometres). The employment of direct
current is hampered by the fact that the method of obtaining high-voltage
direct currents has not been developed so far, and there is no way of
transformation of d.c. voltage.
through two copper wires to a plant located at a distance of 25 km. The energy loss in
wires must constitute 2% of the transmitted power. Calculate the cross-sectional area of
the wires if the energy is transmitted at (a) a voltage of 50 kV and (b) a voltage of
Although alternating current is known to be used mainly in engineering, in
some cases direct current is required. For example, direct current is used
for feeding radio receivers and transmitters, TV sets, for charging ac­
cumulators, for the electrolytic method of obtaining metals, for driving the
engines of trams, trolleybuses and electric locomotives 8 and for many9
chapter.
Chapter 17
other purposes. For this reason, the devices which convert an alternating
current into a direct current, or rectify it, are of great practical importance.
The construction of these devices, called rectifiers, is based on the
employment of the so-called rectifier valves, i.e. the devices which let the
current pass in one direction and do not conduct it in the opposite direc­
tion. One such valve was considered by us in Sec. 8.16. It is a diode with a
thermionic (filament) cathode. If we connect such a valve to an a.c. circuit
in series with a load for which a direct current is required (Fig. 315), the
f ig .315.
A half-wave rectifier.
current will pass through the circuit only for half a period, when the fila­
ment serves as the cathode and the cold plate as the anode. In the next half­
period, when the cold plate is the cathode and the filament is the anode, the
current cannot pass through the valve because the electrons emitted by the
filament are not attracted by the field to the plate but on the contrary are
repelled back to the filament. Therefore, the current through the load is
direct, i.e. it does not change its direction. The form of such a pulsating
current is shown in Fig. 316. This way of rectifying an alternating current
is called the half-wave rectification.
The form of current for a half-wave rectification.
In order to smooth the pulsations of current in a circuit, a more com­
plex full-wave rectification circuit shown in Fig. 317 has to be used. In this
case the voltage from a supply system is delivered to the primary of a
transformer, and the middle of the secondary is connected to a separate
terminal. During half a period, terminal a will clearly be at a higher poten­
tial relative to midpoint b, i.e. will have the plus sign relative to it, while
point c will have the minus sign relative to b. During the next half-period,
point c will have the plus sign relative to b and point a will have the minus
sign relative to b.
The extreme points a and c of the transformer’s secondary are con­
to each other and are heated either by a separate battery or with the help of
a separate step-down winding of the transformer. Figure 317 shows that a
load is connected between the midpoint of the transformer and the cath­
odes of the rectifiers. During the half-period when point a is positive
relative to b, and point c is negative, the current passes only through the
first valve while the second valve is closed, i.e. it does not conduct current.
During the next half-period, the valves exchange their roles: the first valve
is closed and the current passes only through the second valve. The direc­
tions of these currents are indicated in Fig. 317 by the arrows. Thus, the
current of the same direction passes through the load during both half­
periods. The form of this current is shown in Fig. 318 by the dashed line.
T ransformer
Primary
Secondary
A full-wave rectifier.
In order to smooth the pulsations of the rectified current, the so-called
filters are used. The simplest filter is a capacitor having a sufficiently high
capacitance and connected in parallel to the load. Such a capacitor (shown
The form of current for a full-wave rectification.
by the dashed line in Fig. 315) is charged during the half-period when the
rectifier conducts the current and is discharged through the load during the
A still more perfect filter consists of a large-inductance coil with an iron
core and two capacitors. The coil is connected in series with the load while
the capacitors are connected in parallel to it: one before the coil and the
other after it (Fig. 317). The emf of self-induction in the coil opposes the
changes in the current. It opposes the current while it increases and sustains
the current while it decreases. The form of the smoothed current is shown
in Fig. 318 by the solid broken line.
Two-electrode vacuum rectifier valves with thermionic cathodes are
called kenotrons (see Sec. 8.16). They are widely used in radio receivers,
TV sets and other radio-engineering devices.
Kenotrons (high-vacuum hot-cathode rectifier tubes) let through only
comparatively weak currents up to a few tens of a milliampere. When
strong currents (up to 50 A) have to be rectified, gas-filled rectifier diodes
are used instead (Fig. 319). They are also two-electrode valves with a hot
A gas-filled rectifier diode: (a) general view; (b) notation.
A mercury-arc rectifier.
cathode and a metallic or carbon anode, but unlike kenotrons, it contains
mercury vapour or an inert gas. The electrons emitted by the hot cathode
ionize mercury atoms on their way to the anode. The positive ions produc­
ed facilitate the emission from the cathode, and the current through such a
valve is much stronger than in a high vacuum rectifier valve.
Finally, when very strong currents are to be rectified (tip to 200 A at a
voltage up to 50 kV), mercury-arc rectifiers are employed as valves. Such a
rectifier consists of a glass or metal vessel (Fig. 320) in which an arc
discharge takes place in the mercury vapour between cathode 1 (liquid mer­
cury) and graphite electrodes 2 and 3 soldered in side tags. The additional
electrodes 4 and 5 ensure the operation of the rectifier at small loads. Mer­
cury contained in pipe 6 serves for igniting the arc. The arc discharge is
observed in the vessel only when mercury is a cathode. Then a bright spot
evaporation of mercury occurs in this region, and mercury vapour fills the
whole vessel at a high pressure. The same spot is a source of electrons
which move under the action of the electric field to electrode 2 or electrode
to the mercury and the other anode.
Such a rectifier is connected in a full-wave rectification circuit so that
the arc glows between cathode 1 and anode 2 during one half-period and
between cathode 1 and anode 3 during the next half-period. The current
through the load all the time flows in the same direction. Such rectifiers are
installed almost at all substations supplying current to electric railroads,
trams and trolleybuses.
Along with electronic and gas-discharge rectifiers described above,
solid or semiconductor rectifiers have also become popular during the last
severed decades (their construction was described in Chap. 9). They are
connected in half-wave or full-wave rectification circuits just like highvacuum valves or gas-filled rectifier diodes.
Notation for semiconductor electric rectifiers.
In circuit diagrams, semiconductor rectifiers are denoted symbolically
as shown in Fig. 321. The point indicates the direction in which the current
is conducted. In other words, the device represented by this symbol con­
ducts current only when the electrode shown as the triangle is the anode
Electric Machines: Generators,
Motors and Electromagnets
It was mentioned at the beginning of the previous chapter that modern
engineering employs almost exclusively induction-type generators of elec­
tric current, viz. the machines in which an emf emerges as a result of elec­
tromagnetic induction. For this reason, the term “induction* is usually
omitted, and when electric generators are considered, induction generators
are normally ment.
The simplest model of an induction generator was analyzed in
Sec. 15.1, where it was shown that the emf emerging in the coil rotating in
the magnetic field is alternating. Therefore, the current produced by an in­
duction generator is alternating unless special measures are taken for its
rectification, i.e. it is converted into a constant, or direct current which
does not change its direction. Of course, modern industrial generators are
often designed for a huge power (up to 200-400 thousand kilowatts are
generated in a machine) and are much more complicated than our model.
Such a machine with all auxiliary appliances for controlling its operation,
protecting from damage, distribution of current among consumers, etc. is
a complicated engineering construction (Fig. 322). However, all its parts
required for the operation of any generator irrespective of its complexity
can be singled out in our simple model. These elements are: (a) the induc­
tor, viz. a magnet or electromagnet producing a magnetic field; (b) the ar­
mature, viz. the winding in which an emf is induced as a result of magnetic
flux variation, and (c) slip rings with contact plates (brushes) sliding over
the rings and intended for removing or supplying current to the rotating
part of the generator. The rotating part is called the generator rotor, while
the stationary part is known as the stator.
In our model, an emf was induced when the armature was rotated in the
magnetic Held of the inductor, i.e. the armature was a rotor and the induc­
tor was a stator. However, we can naturally rotate the inductor so that the
armature remains stationary. Thus, both the rotor and the stator may play
the roles of the inductor and the armature. In both cases, the rotor must be
A high-power induction generator.
supplied with slip rings and brushes executing permanent contact during its
rotation. But clearly it is more convenient to supply through sliding con­
tacts comparatively weak current required for magnetizing the inductor.
On the other hand, the current produced in the generator attains huge
values, and for this reason it is more convenient to draw it from stationary
coils, which does not involve sliding contacts. Therefore, in high-power
generators stators are preferably used as armatures and rotors as inductors.
In order to obtain strong magnetic fluxes through the armature wind­
ings, and hence strong variations of these fluxes, the armature is supplied
with an iron core whose ends have a shape ensuring only a small gap be­
tween the magnet poles and the core, which is required for the rotation. In
industrial generators, the inductors producing the magnetic field are main­
ly electromagnets (Fig. 323). Permanent magnets are sometimes used as in­
ductors when designing low-power generators. This is the case with the socalled magnetos, viz. small generators used in certain types of internal
combustion engines for igniting the gas-fuel mixture in the cylinders of an
engine with the help of a spark.
view of an a.c. generator with a rotating inductor and a stationary ar­
mature. The rotor (inductor) of this generator is shown separately in
Chapter 18
C o il
\ coil wound on an iron core rotates in the magnetic field of an electromagnet. The magnetic
flux through the coil is (a) large; (b) small. The magnetic flux varies during the rotation of the
coil, and an alternating current is induced in it.
Schematic diagram of a generator: 1 — stationary armature, 2 — rotating inductor, 3 — slip
rings, 4 — brushes sliding over them.
coils are wound. The windings of these coils in which a direct current pro­
duces a magnetic field are connected in such a way that the north and south
poles of the electromagnets alternate on these horns (Fig. 327). The
done from the following considerations.
A general view of an a.c. generator with internal
poles. The rotor is the inductor, while the stator
is the armature.
The rotor (inductor) of an a.c. generator
with internal poles. The rotor of an auxiliary machine supplying a direct current
to the inductor and fixed on the same
shaft is shown on the right.
The rotating inductor I of a generator (rotor) and
the armature 2 (stator) in whose winding a current
is induced.
If we had only one pair of poles in an inductor, the period of the alter­
Thus, for obtaining an alternating current at a frequency of 50 Hz, the
rotor must rotate at a speed of 50 rps (or 3000 rpm), which is practically
impossible for large-scale machines. On the other hand, with a large
for turning the rotor by the fraction of a circle occupied by a pole pair.
Thus, for example, if we have 6 pairs of poles, it is sufficient to rotate the
rotor at a speed of 500 rpm for obtaining an alternating current at a fre­
quency of 50 Hz.
current reverse its direction?
For this reason, such generators are usually driven by slowly-operating
water turbines or internal combustion engines. However, if we deal with
steam turbines rotating at a frequency of 1500-3000 rpm, a different con­
struction of the rotor (inductor) is used. The rotor does not have pole horns
but is made in the form of a smooth cylinder with the winding dropped in
slots on its outer surface. At a high rotational speed, this is more conve­
mechanical losses.
The shape of pole pieces on the pole horns of a rotor is specially design­
ed so that the emf induced in the windings varies with time according to the
sine law, i.e. the voltage and current produced by the generator have a
sinusoidal form.
The generator stator (its stationary part) is an iron ring with the ar­
mature windings dropped in the slots. In order to reduce losses due to
Foucault currents (see Sec. 15.6), the ring is made not as a single piece but
consists of separate thin iron sheets insulated from one another.
of a gear without any coils. Explain why current is induced in this case in coils II.
It was mentioned earlier (see Sec. 17.16) that although alternating currents
are mainly used in technology, a direct current is also sometimes required.
Such a current can be obtained either by transforming the alternating cur­
rent from the mains with the help of rectifiers considered in Sec. 17.16, or
by using special rf.c. generators. The latter method is often more expedient
and convenient.
D.c. generators are conventional induction generators supplied with a
special contrivance (called the commutator) which makes it possible to
convert the alternating voltage at the terminals (brushes) into direct
voltage.
Armature
Schematic diagram of a d.c. generator: 1 — collector half-rings, 2 — rotating armature
The operating principle of a commutator is illustrated in Fig. 329 which
shows the schematic diagram of a simple model of a d.c. generator with a
commutator. This model differs from the above model of an a.c. generator
generator are connected not with individual rings but with two half-rings 1
separated by an insulating material and fitted on the common cylinder
rotating about the same axis as frame 2. Flexible contacts (brushes) 3 press­
ed against the rotating half-rings are intended to deliver the induced cur­
rent to an external circuit. After each half-turn of the frame, its ends
soldered to half-rings move from one brush to the other. But as was ex­
plained in Sec. 17.1, the direction of the induced current is also reversed
after each half-turn of the frame. Therefore, if the switch-overs in the com­
mutator occur at the same instants of time when the current in the frame
reverses its direction, one brush will always be the positive terminal of the
generator, while the other will be the negative terminal, i.e. the current in
the external curcuit will have the same direction. It can be said that the cur­
rent induced in the armature of the generator is rectified with the help of
the commutator.
Chapter 18
Time dependence of the voltage across the terminals of a d.c. generator on time.
The graph of the voltage across the terminals of such a generator whose
armature consists of a single loop and whose commutator consists of two
half-rings is shown in Fig. 330. It can be seen that although the voltage
across the generator terminals is direct, i.e. does not change its direction, it
varies continuously from zero to a maximum value. Such a voltage and the
corresponding current are often called direct pulsating voltage and current.
It can easily be seen that the voltage and current undergo the entire cycle of
variations during a half-period of alternating emf in the generator wind­
ings. In other words, the pulsation frequency is twice as high as the fre­
quency of the alternating current.
In order to smooth these pulsations and make the voltage not only
direct but also constant, the armature of the generator is made up of a large
to one another, and the commutator is composed not of two half-rings but
of the corresponding number of bars lying on the surface of the cylinder
which rotates on the same shaft with the armature. The ends of each sec­
tion of the armature are soldered to the corresponding pair of bars
separated by an insulating material. Such an armature is known to be of
the drum (cylindrical) type (Fig. 331).
A dismounted d.c. generator: I — field frame, 2 — armature, 3 — end shields, 4 — brushes
with brush-holders, secured on a rocker arm, 5 — pole core.
four armature sections and two pairs of bars in the commutator. The
general view of a d.c. generator is shown in Fig. 334. This type of
generator is rated for a power from 0.37 to 130 kW, voltages of 115,
A d.c. generator with four armature sections and four commutator bars.
Chapter 18
The general view of a d.c. generator.
It can be seen from Figs. 332 and 333 that contrary to a.c. generators,
the rotating part of a d.c. generator, viz. its rotor, is the armature of the
machine (of the drum type), while the inductor is placed in the stationary
part of the machine, viz. serves as its stator. The stator (generator field
frame) is made of cast steel or pig iron. The horns fixed on its internal sur­
face are intended for windings producing the magnetic field in the machine
practice, several such pole pairs are normally arranged in a stator. All their
windings are connected in series, and the ends are connected to terminals m
and n through which a current is supplied for producing a magnetic field in
the machine.
Since rectification occurs only at the generator’s commutator and an
alternating current is induced in each section, the core of the armature is
Parts of a d.c. generator: (a) pole core with excitation winding; (b) steel armature sheet with a
slot at the centre.
made of separate steel sheets to avoid strong heating by Foucault currents.
Recesses for laying active wires of the armature are stamped on the edges
of the sheets and a hole for the shaft with a key is provided at the centre of
the sheet (Fig. 3356). These sheets are insulated from one another by paper
or layers of varnish.
Why is the stator of an a.c. generator assembled from separate steel sheets while
the stator of a d.c. generator is a bulky steel or pig-iron casting?
The circuit diagram for the connection of separate sections of armature
winding with commutator bars is shown in Fig. 333. Here the circle with
recesses represents the rear end face of the iron core with long wires of in­
dividual sections layed in the slots in parallel to the cylinder axis. These
wires, which are known as active in electrical engineering, are numbered
from 1 to 8 in the figure. On the rear endface of the armature, these wires
are connected pairwise by the leads which are shown in the figure by the
dashed lines marked by a, 6, c and d. Thus, each pair of active wires and a
lead form a separate frame (section of the armature) with the free ends
soldered to a pair of commutator bars.
The first section consists of active wires 1 and 4 and lead a. Its ends are
soldered to commutator bars I and II. The free end of the active wire 3,
which together with the active wire 6 and lead 6 forms the second section, is
soldered to the same bar II. The free end of this section is soldered to the
commutator bar III to which the end of the third section (consisting of ac­
tive wires 5 and 8 and lead c) is soldered. The other free end of the third
section is soldered to the commutator bar IV. Finally, the ends of the
fourth section consisting of active wires 7 and 2 and lead d are soldered to
the commutator bars IV and I respectively.
Thus, all sections of the drum armature are connected to one another so
that they form a closed circuit. For this reason, such an armature is called
short-circuited.
The commutator bars I-IV and brushes P and Q are shown in Fig. 333
in the same plane. In actual practice, however, these elements, as well as
the wires connecting them to the ends of the sections and shown in the
figure by solid lines, are arranged on the opposite side of the cylinder.
Let us consider this circuit diagram in more detail in order to reveal the main peculiarities
of the construction and the operation of a drum armature.
Brushes P and Q are pressed against a pair of opposite bars of the commutator. Figure
III. It can easily be seen that starting, for example, from brush P, we can arrive at brush Q
along two branches connected in parallel between them: either through sections 1 and 2 or
through sections 4 and 3, as shown schematically in Fig. 336a. After a quarter of a turn, the
Circuit diagram of connection of armature sections to the brushes at two instants of time
separated by a quarter of a period: (a) one branch contains sections 1 and 2 and the other, sec­
tions 3 and 4; (b) the first branch contains sections 4 and 7, while the second, sections 2 and 3,
In the external circuit (load), the current always flows from P to Q.
brushes will be in contact with plates II and IV, but again two parallel branches with sections 4
and 1 in one branch and sections 2 and 3 in the other will be between them (Fig. 336£). The
same will take place at other instants of the armature rotation.
Thus, the circuit diagram of the short-circuited armature splits at any instant of time into
two parallel branches between the brushes with half the armature sections connected in series
in each branch.
During the rotation of the armature in the field of the inductor, an alternating emf is in­
duced in each section. The directions of the currents induced at a certain instant in different
sections are marked by arrows in Fig. 336. In a period, all the directions of the induced emf’s
and currents will be reversed, but since the brushes change places at the moment of the rever­
sal, the current in the external circuit will always have the same direction. Brush P is always
the positive terminal of the generator, while brush Q is the negative terminal. Thus, the com­
mutator rectifies the alternating emf induced in individual sections of the armature.
cuit splits oppose each other. Therefore, if there were no current in the external circuit, i.e. no
load were connected to the generator terminals, the total emf in the short-circuited armature
would be equal to zero, i.e. there would be no current in the armature circuit. The situation
would be the same as when two voltaic cells are connected in the same way in the absence of
external load (Fig. 337a). If, however, we connect a load to these cells (Fig. 337b), they will
€=> {a) There is no current in a circuit consisting of two “opposed” cells without a load, (b) In the
presence of a load, the cells are connected in parallel to it. The current through the load is
branched so that half of it passes through each branch.
be connected in parallel relative to the external circuit, i.e. the voltage across the terminals of
the circuit (M and N ) will be equal to the voltage across each cell. The same obviously will
take place in our generator if some load (lamps, motors, etc) is connected to its terminals (Af
and N in Fig. 333): the voltage across the terminals o f the generator will be equal to the
voltage produced by each o f the two parallel branches constituting the armature circuit.
The emf induced in each branch is made up of the em fs induced in each of the seriesconnected sections forming this branch. Therefore, the instantaneous value o f the resultant
em f is equal to the sum o f the instantaneous values o f individual em fs. But while determining
the form of the resultant voltage across the terminals of a generator, two circumstances must
be taken into account: (a) due to the presence of the commutator, each of the voltages being
added is rectified, i.e. has the form shown by curves 1 or 2 in Fig. 338; (b) these voltages are
Time variation of voltage: 1 and 2 in two sections of the winding connected to the same pair of
commutator bars, 3 — across generator terminals. Dashed straight lines correspond to the
average values of the corresponding voltages.
shifted in phase by a quarter of a period since the sections constituting each branch are
displaced relative to one another by tt/2. Curve 3 in Fig. 338, obtained by adding the cor­
responding coordinates of curves 1 and 2, represents the form of the voltage across the
generator terminals. It can be seen that the pulsations on this curve have a double frequency
and are much weaker than the pulsations in each section. The voltage and current in the circuit
are not only direct (having the same direction) but also nearly constant.
In order to smooth pulsations further and make the current practically constant, not four
but considerably larger number of individual sections (8, 16, 24, ...) are arranged on the
generator armature. The same number of separate bars is contained in the commutator.
Naturally, this considerably complicates the circuit diagram, but such an armature does not
differ in principle from the one described above. All these sections form a single shortcircuited system splitting into two parallel branches relative to generator brushes. In each
branch em fs shifted in phase relative to one another and connected in series are induced, their
almost constant emf with very small pulsations.
It was mentioned in Sec. 18.1 that the magnetic Held in generators is pro­
duced by electromagnets with a direct current passing through their wind­
ings. In a.c. generators, the current for inductor windings is supplied either
from a separate accumulator battery, or (which is done more often) from a
separate d.c. generator fixed on the same shaft with the main generator (see
by the current from a separate source, are known as separately excited
generators.
In d.c. generators, the direct current produced by a generator itself can
be used for creating a constant magnetic Held. Generators of this type are
called self-excited generators.1
The inductor, armature and the mains can be connected in two dif­
ferent ways shown schematically in Figs. 339 and 340.
Inductor
[To mains
Circuit diagram for connection of the inductor, armature and mains for a series generator.
ductor, the armature and the mains are connected in series so that the en­
tire current generated in the armature during the operation of the generator
passes consecutively through the inductor and the mains. The current
through the inductor in this case is equal to the current in the m ains.*
An outdated name of this generator is the dynamo.
Circuit diagram for connection of the armature, inductor and mains in a shunt generator:
^control — rheostatic controller in the inductor circuit, /?start — starter rheostat in the armature
circuit.
In a shunt generator (Fig. 340), the armature and the inductor circuits
are connected in parallel and then to the mains (load).
Thus the current emerging in the armature circuit is branched: a part of
it passes through the mains, while the other part is branched through the
inductor windings to produce the magnetic field required for the operation
of the generator. In this case, the current in the inductor constitutes ju st a
from the mains? Can a shunt generator be started up in such a way?
If the electromagnets of a generator were completely demagnetized by
the moment of starting, i.e. if they did not produce a magnetic field, no
emf would obviously be induced in it during the rotation of the armature,
and there would be no current for feeding the electromagnets. In actual
practice, however, the cores of the electromagnets which have once been
magnetized always preserve a certain (perhaps weak) residual magnetiza­
tion. Thus, a magnetic field always exists in the generator, although this
field was very weak before its operation. As soon as the armature starts to
rotate in this field, a weak current is induced in it. Passing through the elec­
tromagnet windings, this current enhances the magnetic field, and this in­
crease brings about an increase in the induced emf and current. Then the
field is amplified still further, causing a further increase in the induced cur­
rent, and so on. Thus, the voltage across the generator terminals, which is
very small at the initial stage, rapidly increases and attains the value for
which the generator has been rated. 2
always indicated. A generator should not be started in the opposite direction. Why?
What will happen if we start the generator in the backward direction?
demagnetized and does not generate any voltage when started?
The operating properties of shunt and series generators differ essential­
ly. In the latter case, the armature and inductor circuit of the generator, if
disconnected from the mains, turns out to be open, and no current can pass
through it. For this reason, the process of self-excitation described above
will not occur, i.e. there will be no gradual increase in the emf induced in
the armature.^Consequently, a series generator cannot be started in the noload regime. As the load is being increased, i.e. the resistance of the exter­
current in the inductor (which is equal to the current in the mains) also in­
creases. Until the iron the inductor is made of reaches magnetic saturation,
the magnetic flux produced by the inductor will increase together with the
emf induced in the armature and with the voltage across the generator ter­
minals. As soon as the iron is magnetized to saturation, a further increase
in the current will cause only a small increase in the magnetic flux, which
windings. For this reason, the voltage across the generator terminals will
rapidly decrease. When the external circuit is short-circuited, the voltage
drops to zero, while the short-circuit current will exceed a few times the
rated current for the generator.
Thus, the dependence of the voltage across the terminals of a series
generator on the current supplied by it to the external circuit has the form
represented in Fig. 341 (100% correspond to the normal values of the
voltage across the generator terminals and the current in the mains). This
curve, which is known as the external characteristic of the generator, in­
dicates that as the load increases, the voltage first grows sharply, attains
generator and not suppresses it. Otherwise, the emf induced in the armature would decrease
and tend to zero instead of increasing.
the rated value at the rated current, and then drops to zero. Obviously, for
practical purposes such a strong dependence of the generator voltage on
the supplied current is very inconvenient. For this reason, series generators
are used as d.c. generators in exceptionally rare cases.
The external characteristic of a shunt generator has a completely dif­
ferent form (Fig. 342). As the resistance of the external circuit is being
reduced, i.e. the current in it increases, the voltage across the generator ter­
minals drops. Why this is so can easily be explained. As the resistance of
the external circuit decreases (the load increases), a larger fraction of cur­
rent in the armature is branched to it and a smaller fraction passes through
the inductor circuit since the currents in these two circuits (parallel to the
armature) are inversely proportional to their resistances (see Sec. 3.12).
Therefore, as the load increases, the current in the inductor circuit becomes
Chapter 18
weaker, and hence the magnetic flux and the emf induced in the armature
become smaller. However, as long as the iron the inductor is made of is in
the state of saturation, this decrease is rather slow, and as the current
changes from zero to the rated value (taken as 100% in the figure), it is
within 10-15% of the rated value of voltage for which the generator is
designed. Thus, the generator voltage varies very little over a quite wide
load interval.
If the resistance of a circuit fed by a shunt generator is reduced still fur­
ther, the current first continues to increase in spite of the decrease in the
voltage across the generator terminals. At a certain load, say, twice as large
as the rated value for the generator, the current attains its maximum value
Imax and then starts to drop. This is explained by the fact that after the iron
of the inductor recovers from magnetic saturation, the voltage drops
abruptly due to the decrease in the current in the inductor windings, and
the effect of this process is stronger than the influence of the decrease in the
resistance of the external circuit. In the case of short-circuiting, the current
drops to a relatively small value (7sh c in Fig. 342) so that short-circuiting is
Voltage variation due to the change in the current in the external circuit
can be reduced still further in the so-called compound generators. In these
machines, the pole pieces of the inductor have two windings. One of them
is connected to the armature in series, while the other in parallel. Since an
increase in the load causes an increase in the emf due to the former wind­
ings and a decrease in the emf due to the latter windings, the appropriate
design may ensure a practically constant voltage across the generator ter­
minals at considerable changes of the current in the external circuit.
The three-phase system of alternating current, which was invented and
developed at the end of the 19th century by the Russian electrical engineer
M. Dolivo-Dobrovolsky (1862-1919), is now widely used all over the world.
This system ensures the most advantageous conditions for the transmission
of electric energy through wires and makes it possible to construct electric
motors simple in design and convenient in operation.
The three-phase system o f electric circuits is a system consisting o f three
circuits with alternating em f’s o f the same frequency, but shifted in phase
relative to one another by 1/3 o f the period (<p = 2ir/3). Each individual
circuit of this system is called for brevity its phase, and the system of the
three phase-shifted alternating currents in these circuits is known just as the
three-phase current.
Almost all generators installed at electric power plants are three-phase
generators. Every such generator is essentially a combination of three a.c.
generators in one machine. These generators are designed so that the emf’s
induced in them are shifted relative to one another by a third of a period as
shown in Fig. 343.
Time dependences for the emf’s induced in the ar­
mature windings of a three-phase generator.
Si Three pairs of independent wires connected to
three armatures of a three-phase generator feed
a lighting system.
The schematic diagram of such a generator is shown in Fig. 344. It con­
tains three independent armatures arranged in the stator of the machine
and displaced by 1/3 of the circle (120°) relative to one another. They have
an inductor in common, which rotates at the centre of the generator (it is
represented by the permanent magnet in the figure). An emf of the same
frequency is induced in each coil, but the moments when these emf’s go
through zero (or attain the maximum value) turn out to be shifted by 1/3 of
a period relative to one another since the inductor takes 1/3 of a period to
go from one coil to the next.
Each winding of a three-phase generator is an independent generator
and a power source. Connecting wires to them as shown in Fig. 344, we
could obtain three independent circuits which would supply energy to
various loads, say, lamps. In this case, we would need six wires to transm it
the whole of the energy. It is possible, however, to connect the w indings of
a three-phase generator in such a way that we can do with four or even
three wires, i.e. save wires significantly.
The four-wire system for the star connection of the windings of a three-phase generator.
Loads (groups of lamps) I, II, and III are fed by phase voltages.
The first of these methods, known as the star connection, is illustrated
in Fig. 345. We shall call terminals 7,2 and 3 of the windings the starts and
terminals 7 ', 2 ' and 3 ' the finishes of the corresponding phases. The star
connection consists in that the finishes of all the windings are connected at
a point of the generator which is referred to as the neutral. The generator is
connected with power consumers with the help of four wires: three line
wires originating at the starts 7, 2, 3 of the windings and the neutral wire
leading to the neutral of the generator. Thus, we have here a four-wire
system.
The voltage between the neutral and the start of a phase is called the
phase voltage, while the voltage between the starts of windings, i.e. be­
tween points 7 and 2, 2 and 5, and 3 and 7, is known as the line voltage.
Phase voltages are usually denoted by t/,, U2 and U3, or in general C/ph,
while line voltages are denoted by Ul2, U23 and t/31, or in general f/line.
It can be proved that there exists the following relation between the
amplitudes (or effective values) of phase and line voltages for the star con­
^„e = ^
Ph = l - 7 3 t /ph.
Thus, for example, if the phase voltage £/ph of a generator is 127 V, the line
voltage between the star-connected windings of the generator is C/Une =
Calculations which will be omitted here show that for a uniform
loading of all three phases of a generator, i.e. for approximately the same
currents in each phase, the current in the neutral wire is equal to zero.
Therefore, in this case we can eliminate the neutral wire and go over to a
more economical three-wire system shown in Fig. 346. In this case the
loads are connected between the pairs of line wires.
The three-wire system for the star connection of a generator windings. Loads (groups of
lamps), I, II, and III are fed by line voltages.
With a nonsymmetric loading, the current in the neutral wire differs
from zero, but generally it is weaker than the current in the line wires. For
this reason, the neutral wire can be made thinner than the line wires. In
operation with three-phase current, the loads of different phases should be
made the same if possible. For this reason, for example, in the four-wire
lighting system of a large building, the neutral wire and a line wire are led
to each flat so that on the average the loading of each phase is the same.
With a three-wire system, wires 1 and 2 are led to one group of rooms, 2
and 3 to another group, and 3 and 1 to the third group for the same pur­
pose of symmetric loading.
The other method of connecting generator windings, which also is bas­
ed on the three-wire system, is the delta connection shown in Fig. 347.
Circuit diagram of the delta connection of the windings
of a three-phase generator.
Here the finish of each winding is connected with the start of the next wind­
ing so that they form a closed triangle. The line wires are connected to the
vertices of this triangle, viz. points 7,2 and 3. It can easily be seen that for
the delta connection the line voltage o f the generator is equal to its phase
voltage: C/Iine = Uph. Thus, the change from the star connection to the
delta connection reduces the line voltage to V3 o f the previous value. The
delta connection is applicable for a symmetric or nearly symmetric loading
Chapter 18
Une wire
Star connection of loads for a three-wire system.
o f phases. Otherwise, the current in the closed circuit of the windings will
be too strong, which may cause the damage of the generator.
With a three-phase current, individual receivers (loads) fed through
separate pairs of wires can also be connected either star-wise, i.e. so that
one their end is connected to a point in common, and the remaining three
free ends are connected to the line wires of the mains, or delta-wise, i.e. so
that all the loads are connected in series to form a closed circuit, the line
wires of the mains being connected to points 1, 2 and 3. Figure 348 shows
the star connection of the loads for a three-wire system, and Fig. 349 il­
lustrates the star connection of the load for a four-wire system (in this case.
the common point of all loads is connected to the neutral wire). Figure 350
gives the diagram of the delta connection of the loads for a three-wire
system.
For practical purposes, the following fact is important. When the loads
are connected according to the delta-scheme, each load is under the line
voltage, while with the star connection the voltage applied to the load is
equal to 1/V3 o f this value. For a four-wire system, this is illustrated in
Line wire
$ /? $/ // //
V \C \ v' Load II
Line wire
Delta connection of loads for a three-wire system.
Line wire
loads are connected in series between each pair of line voltages. The cur­
rents in these loads are shifted in phase by 2x/3. Calculations show that the
voltage across each load is equal to the corresponding line voltage divided
by V3.
Thus, when we change from the star- to the delta-connection o f the
loads, the voltage, and hence the current in each load, increases by
V3 = 1.73. For example, if the line voltage in a three-wire system is 220 V,
the voltage across each load will be 127 V for the star connection (Fig. 348)
and 220 V for the delta connection (Fig. 350).
A motor with rotating magnetic field, based on the three-phase system, is
the most widespread, convenient and economical among a large variety of
a.c. motors.
In order to explain the principle of construction of such motors, we
shall again consider the experiment represented in Fig. 264. It was then
demonstrated that a metallic ring placed in a rotating magnetic field starts
to rotate in the same direction. The reason behind this rotation is the
change in the magnetic flux through the ring caused by the rotating
magnetic field. This gives rise to the induced current on which the magnetic
field acts with forces producing a torque.
For a three-phase current, i.e. the system of three currents shifted in
phase relative to one another by 2ir/3 (a third of a period), we can easily
obtain a rotating magnetic field without a mechanical rotation of a magnet
or any additional appliances. Figure 351a shows how this can be done.
Three coils wound on iron cores are arranged at an angle of 120° relative to
one another. Each coil carries one of the currents of the system constituting
the three-phase current. These currents produce in the coils the magnetic
fields B,, 8 2 and B3 whose directions are indicated by the arrows. The
magnetic induction of each field varies with time according to the same sine
law as the corresponding current (Fig. 351b). Thus, the magnetic field in
Chapter 18
Obtaining of a rotating magnetic field as a result of the composition of three sinusoidal fields
arranged at 120° to one another and shifted in phase by 2ir/3: (a) arrangement of the coils
producing the rotating field; (b) time variation of the magnetic induction of the fields; (c)
resultant magnetic induction B has a constant magnitude and is rotated by 1/3 of a circle dur­
ing 1/3 of a period.
the space between the coils is the result of the superposition of three alter­
another, and, on the other hand, are shifted in phase by 2tt/3. The instan­
taneous value of the resultant magnetic induction B is the vector sum of the
three components of the fields at a given instant:
B = Bj + B2 + B3.
If we try to determine the law of variation of the magnetic induction B with
time, we will see that the magnitude of the magnetic induction of the resul­
tant field does not change (B preserves a constant value), but the direction
of vector B uniformly varies so that this vector makes a complete turn dur­
ing a period of the current.
Without going into the details of calculations, we shall explain how the
superposition of the three fields Bp Bj and B3 yields the rotating field of a
constant magnitude. The arrows in Fig. 3516 inducate the magnitudes of
the magnetic induction of the three fields at the instants t = 0, t = 773 and
t = 2773 when Bx = 0, B2 = 0 and B} = 0, respectively. In Fig. 351c, the
magnetic inductions B,, Bj and B3 at these three instants are added accord­
ing to the parallelogram rule so that the directions of the arrows B2 and B3,
B, and B3, and B, and B2 correspond to Fig. 351a. Thus, the resultant
magnetic induction B has the same magnitude at these instants, while its
direction is turned by a third of a circle during each third of a period.
If a metal ring (or, which is better, a coil) is placed in such a rotating
field, currents will be induced in it in the same way as if the ring (or coil)
rotated in a stationary field. The interaction of the magnetic field with
these currents gives rise to forces which set the ring (coil) in rotation. This
is the operating principle of a three-phase motor with a rotating magnetic
field, which was realized for the first time by Dolivo-Dobrovolsky.
A knocked-down three-phase a.c. motor: 1 — stator, 2 — rotor, 3 — end shields, 4 — fans,
The construction of this motor is illustrated in Fig. 352. Its stationary
part, viz. stator, is a cylinder assembled from sheet steel with grooves on
the inner surface, which are parallel to the cylinder axis. The wires dropped
in these grooves are connected at the end faces of the stator so that they
form three coils arranged at 120° relative to one another (which were con­
sidered in Sec. 18.4). The starts 7, 2 and 3 of these coils and their finishes
l ' , 2 ' , and 3 ' are connected to six terminals mounted on the field frame of
the machine. The arrangement of the terminals is shown in Fig. 353.
The rotating part of the motor, viz. the rotor, is arranged inside the
stator. It is also a cylinder assembled from separate sheets of steel and fixed
on a shaft with which it can rotate in bearings fixed to side faces (covers) of
the motor. Motors usually have fan blades at the ends of the rotor cylinder,
which produce in the motor a powerful air jet for its cooling. A system of
Arrangement of terminals on a motor panel.
Squirrel-cage rotor of a three-phase motor.
wires connected by rings at the end faces of the rotor cylinder is arranged in
the grooves parallel to the rotor axis. Such a rotor, shown separately in
when a rotating magnetic field is produced in the inner space of the stator.
The rotating field is created by the three-phase system of currents sup­
plied to the stator windings which can be connected either star-wise
voltage in each winding is 1/V3 of the line voltage in the mains, while in the
latter case it is equal to the line voltage. If, for example, the voltage be­
tween each pair of wires in a three-phase system (viz. line voltage) is 220 V,
then with the delta connection of the windings each of them will be under a
voltage of 220 V, while with the star connection, each winding is at 127 V.
Mains
TTT Star connection of the stator windings: (a) circuit diagram of motor connection; (&) connec­
tion of terminals on the panel. Terminals 7 ,2 ' and 3' are “short-circuited” by metal buses.
Terminals 7, 2 and 3 are connected to the wires of a three-phase system.
Mains
Delia connection of stator windings: (a) circuit diagram of connection of the motor; (b) con­
metal buses; terminals 7, 2 and 3 are connected to the wires of a three-phase system.
Thus, if the windings of a motor are rated for 127 V, the motor can
operate at the rated power both from a 220 V system (with the star connec­
tion of its windings) and from a 127 V system (with the delta connection of
its windings). The panel on the motor frame therefore indicates two
voltages at which a given motor can operate, say, 127/220 V or 220/380 V.
The delta connection of the motor windings is used for systems with lower
line voltage, while the star connection is used for systems fed at a higher
voltage.
The torque of a motor is produced by the forces of interaction of the
magnetic Held and the currents induced by it in the rotor. The magnitude
of these currents (or of the emf corresponding to them) is determined by
the speed of rotation of the Held relative to the rotor which itself rotates in
the same direction as the field does. Therefore, if the rotor rotated at the
same speed as the field, there would be no relative motion. The rotor would
then be at rest relative to the field, no emf would be induced in it, there
would be no current in the rotor, and no forces rotating it could emerge.
Hence it is clear that a motor of this type can operate only when the rota­
tional speed of the rotor somewhat differs from the speed of rotation of the
field, i.e. from the current frequency. For this reason, such motors are
referred to in engineering as asynchronous (from the Greek “syn” +
“chronos” meaning matched in time, the prefix “a ” indicating negation).
Thus, if the field rotates at a speed N and the rotor speed is n, the rota­
tion of the field relative to the rotor occurs at a frequency N - n. It is this
speed that determines the emf and current induced in the rotor.
Chapter 18
The quantity S = (N — n ) / N is known in engineering as slip. It plays a very important
role in calculations. The slip is normally expressed in percent.
When an unloaded motor is connected to the mains, at the initial stage
relative to the rotor is high, and the emf induced in the rotor is accordingly
very large (it exceeds 20 times the emf emerging in the rotor when the
motor operates at a rated power). The current in the rotor at this stage is
also much stronger than the rated current. At the starting moment, the
motor develops a considerable torque, and since its inertia is relatively
small, the rotational speed of the rotor rapidly increases and almost attains
the rotational speed of the field. The relative speed becomes almost zero,
and the current in the rotor rapidly attenuates. For motors developing a
low or moderate power, a short-term overloading during their starting
period is not dangerous, while for starting high-power motors (operating at
tens and hundreds of kilowatts), special starter rheostats are employed,
which weaken the current in the windings. As the rated rotational speed of
the rotor is attained, these rheostats are gradually switched off.
As the load of a motor increases, the rotational speed of the rotor
becomes somewhat lower, and the rotational speed of the field relative to
the rotor increases together with the current in the rotor and the torque
developed by the motor. However, a very small change in the rotational
speed of the rotor (approximately up to 6% of the maximum value) is re­
quired to change the motor power from zero to the rated value. Thus, an
asynchronous three-phase motor preserves a nearly constant rotational
speed o f the rotor in a wide range o f load variation. This speed can, in prin­
ciple, be controlled, but the devices required for this purpose are com­
plicated and uneconomical, and hence are not frequently used in practice.
If machines driven by a motor require a different rotational speed, gear or
belt transmissions with various gear ratios are preferred.
Obviously, as the load of a motor increases, i.e. the mechanical power
delivered by it grows, the current in the rotor as well as that in the stator
have to be increased to enable the motor to consume the appropriate elec­
tric power from the circuit. This is done automatically due to the fact that
the current in the rotor also produces a magnetic field in the ambient,
which acts on the stator windings and induces a certain emf in them. The
link between the magnetic flux in the rotor and stator, or the so-called ar­
mature reaction, ensures the change in the current in the stator and the
matching of the electric power consumed from the mains and the
mechanical power delivered by the motor. The details of this process are
quite complicated and will not be discussed here.
It should be borne in mind, however, that althougn an underloaded
motor consumes from the main circuit the amount of energy equal to the
work done by it, in the case of underloading, when the current in the stator
drops, this is due to an increase in the inductive reactance of the stator, i.e.
a decrease in the power factor (see Sec. 17.13), and this deteriorates the
operation conditions in the main circuit as a whole. If, for example, a
power of 3 kW is sufficient for the operation of a machine, and a motor
rated for 10 kW is installed on it, a given plant will bear practically no loss
since the motor will consume only the power required for its operation plus
the losses in the motor proper.3 However, such an underloaded motor has
a large inductive reactance and reduces the power factor of the circuit. It is
unprofitable from the point of view of national economy as a whole. In
order to stimulate the increase in the power factor, the enterprises
distributing electric power among consumers impose penalty on those
plants where the power factor is too low in comparison with the optimal
value, while an increase in the power factor is encouraged.
Thus, the following rules must be observed when working with motors.
machine driven by this motor.
windings o f the stator are delta-connected, it is expedient to change to the
star connection o f the windings. Then the voltage across the windings is
reduced to 1/V3 of the previous value, while the magnetizing current
becomes three times as weak. If such a switch-over has to be made fre-
Change-over from the delta-connection of motor windings (position I, I, I of the knife switch)
to the star connection (position II, II, II of the knife switch).
larger current than a motor rated for a given power. And since the Joule heat losses (viz.
heating of the conductors by current) increase as the squared current, the useless power losses
in an underloaded motor are higher than in a motor operating at the rated power.
Chapter 18
quently, the motor is connected to the mains with the help of a knife switch
in accordance with the circuit diagram shown in Fig. 357. In the first posi­
tion of the switch, we have delta connection, while in the second position it
ensures the star connection.
In order to reverse the direction of the shaft rotation, it is necessary to
change places of two line wires leading to the motor. This can easily be
done with the help of a double-pole switch, as shown in Fig. 358. Moving
the knife switch from position I-I to position II-II, we reverse the direction
of rotation of the magnetic field, and simultaneously the direction of rota­
tion of the shaft.
It was shown above that if a stator contains three coils arranged relative
to one another at 120°, the magnetic field rotates at a speed of the current,
i.e. completes one turn in 1/50 of a second, or makes 3000 revolutions per
minute. The motor shaft will rotate at nearly the same speed. In many
cases, such a rotational speed is too high. To reduce it, not three but six or
I I I ] I)
Circuit diagram for the reversal of the rotation of a threephase motor.
twelve coils are arranged in the stator of a motor. They are connected so
that the north and south poles alternate in the circumference of the stator.
Then the field turns only by half or quarter of a revolution during a current
period, i.e. the motor shaft rotates at a speed of about 1500 or 750 rpm.
Finally, an important remark for practical applications is appropriate
here. At a damage (breakdown) of insulation, the frames and housings of
electric motors and transformers turn out to be under tension relative to
the Earth. A contact with these parts of machines in these conditions can
be hazardous for human beings. In order to eliminate this danger, the field
frames and housings o f electric machines and transformers operating at a
voltage o f 150 V relative to the Earth should be earthed, i.e. reliably con­
with special rules which should be strictly observed to avoid fatal accidents.
Rotating a d.c. generator by an external force, we spend a certain
mechanical power Pmech and obtain the corresponding electric power Pel in
the circuit. Let us make an inverse experiment with a d.c. generator. We
connect an external current source, say, an accumulator battery, to the
generator terminals and pass the current from this source through the in­
ductor and armature of the generator connected in series or in parallel as
shown in Figs. 339 and 340. The generator armature will immediately start
to rotate. Connecting the shaft of the armature with a lathe, we can put it
in operation. The generator now works as an electric motor. The energy is
transformed in the opposite direction: we spend a certain electric power
Pel, which we borrow from an external current source, and convert it into
the corresponding mechanical power Pmech.
The origin of forces producing a torque on the armature of the electric
motor can easily be found out. When a current is passed through the turns
of the armature placed in the magnetic field of the inductor, the forces nor­
mal to the directions of the current and of the magnetic induction of the
field act on the winding. The direction of these forces can be determined
with the help of the left-hand rule (see Sec. (14.2)).
Emergence of the torque acting on a current loop in a magnetic field.
winding (section) of the armature at the moment when the plane of this
winding is at a certain angle to the direction of the magnetic field. It can
Chapter 18
easily be seen that the forces acting on conductors be, ag and de, which lie
in the plane perpendicular to the rotational axis, are always parallel to this
axis. For this reason, they do not exert a torque on the armature but only
tend to deform (compress or stretch) its winding. On the other hand, the
forces acting on conductors ab and cd, which are parallel to the rotational
axis, are normal to this axis and produce a torque which sets in rotation the
armature shaft and the shafts of machines connected to it.
The torque exerted on the armature attains its maximum when the cor­
responding winding lies in the plane parallel to the direction of the
magnetic field. As the winding turns, this torque decreases and vanishes
when the winding is perpendicular to the direction of the Held. In this posi­
tion, the forces exerted on conductors ab and cd lie in the same plane (the
plane of the winding) so that they do not produce a torque but just tend to
deform the winding. At further rotation of the winding, the sign of the tor­
que is reversed, i.e. it starts acting in the opposite direction. Therefore, in
the absence of a commutator, the direction of the torque would change
after each half-turn of the armature, and no long-term rotation would be
possible. But as was shown earlier, the commutator commutes (reverses)
the direction of current in the windings just at the moments when a winding
is normal to the field lines. As a result, the torque preserves its direction,
and the armature perpetually rotates in the same direction.
Thus, when a machine operates as a d.c. generator, the role o f the com­
mutator consists in the rectification o f the alternating current induced in
the machine windings. When the machine works as a motor, the com­
mutator also ’‘rectifies’’ the torque, i.e. makes the machine rotate fo r a long
time in the same direction.
The direction of rotation of a commutator motor is determined by the
relation between the direction of the magnetic field in the inductor and the
direction of current in the armature. Various possible cases are shown in
Direction of rotation of a d.c. motor depending on the directions of the magnetic field and
current: the circles with a cross indicate the current directed away from the observer, while the
circles with a dot, the current directed to the observer.
motor, we must reverse the direction of current either in the armature or in
the inductor of the machine. If we reverse the directions of both currents
simultaneously, say, by connecting the terminal of the motor, that was
formerly connected to the positive pole of the main circuit, to the negative
pole of the main circuit, the motor will rotate in the same direction.
Thus, a d.c. motor supplied with a commutator can also be fed from an
a.c. circuit since each current reversal will cause the simultaneous current
reversal in the inductor and in the armature. However, such a.c. collector
motors are used not very often and mainly as low-power motors. Threephase electric motors with a rotating field, which were described in
Sec. 18.5, are mainly employed in engineering.
Forces are exerted by a magnetic field on current-carrying conductors
of the armature both when this current is induced, i.e. a machine operates
as a generator, and when this current is supplied by an external source, i.e.
the machine operates as a motor.
When the machine works as a generator, according to Lenz’s law these
forces are directed so that the torque produced by them opposes the pro­
cess responsible for the induced emf, i.e. is opposite to the torque rotating
the generator. Thus, the external forces which set the generator in rotation
have to overcome, or counterbalance the forces acting on the armature in
the magnetic field. Clearly, these forces are the stronger, the larger the cur­
rent in the armature, i.e. the higher the electric power consumed from the
circuit feeding the generator. Therefore, as the electric load of the
generator increases, i.e. the electric power Pel delivered by it becomes
higher, the mechanical power Pmech required to maintain the rotation at the
previous speed also increases. This can easily be verified if we try to rotate
the rotor of a generator by hand. For a no-load operation or with a very
small load, even a weak force is sufficient to rotate the shaft. If, however,
we connect to the generator an electric bulb rated for 100 W and try to
rotate the generator rotor so that the bulb have a normal glow, it will be
very difficult. Great efforts should be spent to overcome forces acting in
the magnetic field of the inductor on active conductors of the armature,
which now bear a current of about 1 A. Thus, as the generator load (i.e.
the electric power Pei delivered by it) increases, the mechanical power / amech
consumed by it in order to maintain the former speed of the rotor and the
former voltage in the curcuit also increases.
Similarly, if a machine operates as a motor, an increase in its
mechanical load, i.e. an increase in the mechanical power Pmech delivered
Chapter 18
by it, will bring about the corresponding increase in the electric power Pcl
consumed by the motor from the main circuit, i.e. an increase in the cur­
rent through the armature. This statement can easily be verified by connect­
ing an ammeter to the armature circuit. When the motor does no useful
work or this work is very small, the current in the armature circuit is very
weak. If we increase the load of the armature by holding up its shaft or
connecting a machine to it, the current through the armature, measured by
the ammeter, will automatically grow to the value for which the electric
power consumed from the mains is equal to the useful mechanical power
spent by the motor plus inevitable losses for wire heating (Joule heat), for
magnetization reversal of iron in the armature, and for friction between the
moving parts of the machine connected to the motor.
This automatic matching of the electric and mechanical powers is a direct consequence of
the energy conservation law. But how is it realized? What process causes the increase in the
electric current through the armature due to an increase in the mechanical load of the motor?
To answer this question, it should be borne in mind that irrespective of whether a machine
operates as a generator or as a motor, an emf <fnd is induced in the turns of its armature
rotating in the magnetic field of the inductor. According to Lenz’s law, it is directed against
the voltage
of the external circuit to which the machine is connected. Thus, the voltage
which is actually applied to the armature circuit is equal to the difference
— (?ind, and
hence, according to Ohm’s law, the current in the armature is
_ "ext -
where arm is the resistance of the armature.
If Ucxt > <^d, the energy is consumed from the circuit, i.e. the machine operates as a
motor. If £/ < <^d, the machine supplies energy to the external circuit, i.e. operates as a
generator. The induced emf <^nd is the larger the higher the rotational speed of the armature.
As long as the load of the motor is small, its rotor rotates at a high speed, the induced emf <^nd
is large and is almost equal to Uext, which means that the current in the armature is very weak.
As the mechanical load increases, the rotational speed of the rotor of the motor decreases, and
hence the induced emf <^nd becomes small, and the current
in the armature grows.
D.C. Motors with Shunt and Series Excitation
As in a generator, the windings of the inductor and armature of a motor
can be connected either in series (Fig. 339) or in parallel (Fig. 340). In the
former case, we have a series-wound motor, and in the latter, a shuntwound motor. Compound motors are also used, in which a part of the in­
ductor windings is connected in series with the armature, while the remain­
ing part is connected in parallel to it. Each type of motor has its own
peculiarities which make it expedient in some cases and unprofitable in
other cases.
main circuit is shown in Fig. 361. Since the curcuits of the armature and of
Circuit diagram of connection of a shunt motor. The brass
arc 1 over which the handle of the starter rheostat is sliding
is connected through terminal 2 to the end of the rheostatic
controller and through terminal 3, to the starter rheostat.
This is done so as not to disconnect the excitation circuit
when the starter rheostat is turned to the dead contact 4 and
the current is switched off.
the inductor are in this case independent, the currents in them can be con­
trolled independently with the help of separate rheostats connected in their
circuits. The rheostat
connected to the armature circuit is called the
starter rheostat, while the rheostat /?control connected to the inductor circuit
is known as the rheostatic controller. While starting a shunt motor, the
starting rheostat must necessarily be introduced completely. As the motor
gains the rotational speed, the resistance of the rheostat Rstait is gradually
reduced, and as the rated speed is attained, this rheostat is completely
disconnected from the circuit. Shunt motors, and especially those
operating at a high power, by no means should be started without a starter
rheostat. Similarly, if a motor has to be switched off, the rheostat must
first be gradually introduced, and only after this the knife switch connect­
ing the motor to the main circuit must be turned off.
These rules for motor switching on or off can easily be explained. It was mentioned above
[see formula (18.6.1)] that the current in the armature is
U cxt ~
^ind arm where UrM is the voltage in the main circuit and <^nd is the emf induced in the armature wind­
ings. At the initial moment, when the motor has no time to gather the required rotational
speed, the emf (f[nd is very small, and the current through the armature is approximately given
Chapter 18
The resistance of the armature is normally very low. It is designed so that the voltage
drop in the armature,
= 7armR&rm, does not exceed 5-10% of the voltage in the main cir­
cuit for which the motor is rated. Therefore, in the absence of a starter rheostat, the current in
the armature would exceed 10-20 times the rated current for a complete load, which may cause
damage. On the other hand, when a starter rheostat having a resistance RsVut is introduced
completely, the starting current in the armature is
■^start
^arm + ^start
The resistance of the starter rheostat is chosen so that the starting current exceeds the rated
current not more than 1.5-2 times.
Let us illustrate what has been said above with a numerical example. Let a motor of a
power of 1.2 kW, rated for a voltage of 120 V, have an armature resistance /?arm = 1.2 0.
The current through the armature for a complete load is
If we connected this motor to a main circuit without a starter rheostat, the starting cur­
rent passing through the armature in a few first seconds would be
which is 10 times higher than the rated operating current in the armature. If we want the start­
ing current not to exceed the rated value more than twice, i.e. to be equal to 20 A, the starting
resistance must be chosen so that the following equality holds:
= 20 A,
whence R start
. t = 4.8 0.
Obviously, an abrupt stop o f a shunt motor without its switching o ff
case the emf 4 nd drops to zero, and the current in the armature increases to
such an extent that the excess of the Joule heat liberated in it may lead to
insulation melting and even to damaging the wires in the winding (the
motor is said to “bum out*).
The rheostatic controller /?control connected to the circuit of the inductor
is intended to alter the rotational speed of a motor. By varying the
resistance in the inductor circuit with the help of this rheostat, we change
the current in the inductor circuit, and hence the magnetic field in which
the armature rotates. It was shown earlier that for a given load the current
in the motor automatically assumes such a value that the produced torque
balances the retarding torque produced by the load of the motor. This is
due to an appropriate value acquired by the induced emf. But the induced
emf is determined, on the one hand, by the magnetic induction, and on the
other hand, by the rotational speed of the armature.
The larger the magnetic flux through the inductor, the smaller must be
the rotational speed of the motor required for obtaining a certain value of
the emf, and vice versa, the weaker the magnetic flux, the higher must be
the rotational speed. Hence, in order to increase the rotational speed o f a
shunt motor at a given load, the magnetic flu x in the inductor must be
weakened, i.e. a larger resistance must be introduced in the inductor circuit
with the help of the rheostatic controller. On the contrary, to reduce the
rotational speed o f a shunt motor, the magnetic flu x in the inductor must
be increased, i.e. the resistance in the inductor circuit must be reduced with
the help of the rheostatic controller.
Using a rheostatic controller, the rated rotational speed of a motor can
be attained even in the absence of a load. As the load increases, the current
in the armature must increase, while the emf induced in it must decrease.
This is realized through a certain reduction of the rotational speed of the
armature. However, the reduction of the rotational speed due to the in­
crease in the load from zero to the rated power of the motor is normally in­
significant and does not exceed 5-10% of the rated rotational speed of the
motor. This is mainly due to the fact that in shunt motors the current in the
inductor does not change with the change o f the current in the armature. If
we wanted to maintain a rotational speed constant at a changing load, this
could be done by slightly changing the current in the inductor circuit with
the help of the rheostatic controller.
Thus, from the point of view of operation, d.c. shunt motors are
characterized by the following two properties: (a) their rotational speed re­
mains almost constant upon a variation o f the load, and (b) their rotational speed can be varied over a wide range with the help o f the rheostatic
controllers. For this reason, this type of motor is widely used in industry
when the above two features are important (say, for driving lathes and
other machines whose rotational speed should not considerably depend on
the load).
To Exercise 18.7.1.
Chapter 18
and a rheostatic controller combined. Analyze this diagram and explain the role played
by individual parts of this rheostat.
wire with a low resistance, and the other made of a thin wire having a high resistance.
Which of the rheostats should be used as the starter and which as a rheostatic controller?
Why? main circuit is shown in Fig. 363. Here the current in the armature is at the
Circuit diagram of connection of a series motor.
same time the inductor current, and hence the starter rheostat Rstait changes
the current in the armature as well as in the inductor. In no-load operation
or with a small load, the current in the armature is known to be very small,
i.e. the induced emf
must be nearly equal to the voltage in the mains.
But the field of the inductor is also weak when the current in the armature
and in the inductor is small. Therefore, for a small load the required emf
can be obtained only at the expense of a very high rotational speed of the
motor. Consequently, for very weak currents (small load), the rotational
speed of a series motor becomes so high that it may become dangerous
from the point of view of the mechanical strength of the motor. It is known
as the “runaway” of the motor. This situation is inadmissible, and for this
reason series motors cannot be started without load or with a very small
load (less than 20-25% of the rated power of the motor). For the same
reason, these motors are not recommended for operation with lathes or
other machines connected to a motor with the help of belt or rope transmis­
sions since the breakdown or an accidental slip of the belt may lead to “rac­
ing” of the motor. Thus, an increase in the load o f a series motor causes an
increase in the armature current and in the magnetic field o f the inductor.
As a result, the rotational speed o f the motor abruptly decreases, while the
torque developed by it sharply increases.
These properties of series motors make them successfully applicable in
transport facilities (trams, trolleybuses and electric locomotives) and for
lifting devices (cranes) since in these cases large torques are required at
starting moments for a very large load and for low rotational speeds, while
for smaller loads (in normal operation) smaller torques and higher speeds
are needed.
The control of rotational speed of a series motor is usually executed by
a rheostatic controller connected in parallel to the inductor windings
Circuit diagram of connection of a rheostat controlling
the rotational speed of a series motor.
the armature current is branched into it and the weaker the current through
the inductor windings. But the reduction of the current in the inductor
Table 8. Advantages, Disadvantages and Applications of Various Types of Motor
M ain disadvantages
Applications
Three-phase a.c. 1. Weak dependence of
motor with
rotational speed on
rotating field
load.
economical operation of
the construction.
controlling rota­
tional speed.
the starting stage.
Lathes and machines for
which constant rotational
speed is required under a
varying load, but the speed
control is not important.
D.c. shunt
motor
speed at varying loads.
rotational speed
Small torque in
the starting stage
Lathes and machines which
require a constant con­
trollable rotational speed for
varying loads.
D.c. series
motor
Large torque in the start­ Strong
dependence of
ing stage
rotational speed
on load
Type o f m o to r
M ain advantages
Traction motors in trams
and electric locomotives,
crane motors, etc.
Chapter 18
leads to an increase in the rotational speed of the motor, and vice versa.
Therefore, in contrast to a shunt motor, the speed o f rotation o f a series
motor can be increased by reducing the resistance o f the inductor circuit
with the help of a rheostatic controller. In order to reduce the rotational
speed o f a series motor, the resistance o f the inductor circuit should be in­
creased by switching on the rheostatic controller.
while with a shunt motor this is possible.
Concluding the section, we compare the main advantages and disad­
vantages of electric motors considered in this section, compiling them in
the form of a table.
In every electric current generator or motor, some useless energy losses
always take place. They include the losses on heating wires by currents
passing through them (copper losses), the losses on Foucault currents and
on heating steel in the cores during magnetization reversal (steel losses),
and friction losses. Therefore, when a machine operates as a generator, it
supplies to the circuit a somewhat lower electric power P el than the
mechanical power P mech spent for the generator rotation. The efficiency o f
a generator is the ratio o f the delivered electric power to the mechanical
power consumed:
Similarly, when a machine operates as a motor, it delivers a somewhat
lower mechanical power than the electric power consumed by it from the
mains. The efficiency o f the motor is the ratio o f the delivered mechanical
power to the electric power consumed:
'm mech Energy losses in generators and motors are comparatively small, and
their efficiency is close to unity (100%).
It was shown in Sec. 18.6 that any d.c. generator can be ‘reversed*. If its armature is rotated
by an external force, the machine operates as a generator, i.e. supplies current to the external
circuit. On the contrary, if a current from the external circuit is passed through it, the machine
operates as a motor. This reversibility is a typical property of not only induction generators
considered in this chapter* but also of other types of generators which were considered earlier.
wires. The transmission belt is removed from the left-hand machine to reduce friction and
facilitate its rotation. If the right-hand machine is rotated, for example, by hand, it operates
as a generator converting the mechanical work done by the muscles of the hand into the
energy of electric current. Passing through the other machine, this current makes it rotate, i.e.
operate as a motor. Here the reverse transformation of the electric energy into the mechanical
work takes place.
Chemical current sources, viz. galvanic cells, are also reversible. This is observed during
the polarization of cells (see Sec. 6.4) and especially in accumulators (see Sec. 6.6). It was
converted into chemical energy, while in discharging the reverse transformation of the
chemical energy to the electric energy occurs.
The emergence of thermo-electromotive force is .also reversible. When we maintain a
temperature difference between two junctions of a thermocouple at the expense of an external
source of heat, the thermocouple operates as a heat engine transforming a part of the heat
flow to electric energy. On the contrary, if the current from the external source is passed
through the thermocouple, one of its junctions will be cooled and the other will be heated, i.e.
the heat flow from the cold junction to the hot one will appear at the expense of the electric
energy. This phenomenon is known as the Peltier effect after the scientist who discovered it. If
the current is passed in the direction which would correspond, for the thermoelectric current,
to the situation when, say, junction a is warmer than junction by then, due to the Peltier ef­
fect, junction a will be cooled and junction b will be heated.
The Peltier effect in semiconductor thermocouples made it possible to design
refrigerating machines which have as high economical efficiency as refrigerators used in
household.
Reversibility of Wimshurst machines. The right machine operates as a generator and the left
one as a motor.
High-quality permanent magnets have a large number of important ap­
plications in science and technology, for example, in electric measuring in­
struments. But the fields produced by them are not very strong, although
special alloys obtained recently make it possible to obtain strong perma­
alloys include, for example, cobalt steel containing about 50% iron, 30%
cobalt and some admixtures of tungsten, chromium and carbon. Another
disadvantage of permanent magnets is that their magnetic induction cannot
be varied rapidly. In this respect, current-carrying solenoids (elec­
tromagnets) are much more convenient since their field can easily be chang­
ed by varying the current in the solenoid winding. The field of a solenoid
can be increased hundreds and thousands of times by introducing an iron
core into it. Most of electromagnets used in engineering have such a con­
struction.
A simple electromagnet can be made at home. It is sufficient to wind a
few tens of turns of insulated wire on an iron rod (bolt or nail) and connect
the ends of this winding to a d.c. source like an accumulator of a galvanic
cell (Fig. 366).4 Sometimes electromagnets have a horse-shoe shape
A simple self-made electromagnet in the form of a bar.
rheostat having a resistance 1-20 so that the current consumed from the battery be not too
strong.
A self-made horse-shoe magnet.
The Held of a coil with an iron core is much stronger than that of a coil
without a core since the iron inside the coil is strongly magnetized, and its
field is superimposed on the fidd of the coil. However, iron cores used in
electromagnets for amplifying the field are expedient only to a certain
limit. Indeed, the field of an electromagnet is the superposition of the field
produced by the current-carrying winding and the field of the magnetized
core. For weak currents, the latter field is considerably stronger than the
former one. As the current in the winding increases, these two fields first
increase to the same extent, namely, in proportion to the current, so that
the role of the core remains derisive. However, with a further increase in
the current passing through the winding, the magnetization of the iron is
slowed down, and the iron approaches the state of magnetic saturation.
When practically all molecular currents become oriented in parallel, a fur­
ther increase in the current through the winding cannot add anything to the
magnetization of the iron, while the field of the winding continues to grow
in proportion to the current. At a strong current in the winding (to be more
precise, at the moment when the number of ampere-turns per metre ap­
proaches 106), the field produced by the winding turns out to be much
stronger than the field of the saturated iron core so that the core becomes
practically useless and only complicates the construction of the elec­
tromagnet. For this reason, high-power electromagnets are made without
an iron core.
Obviously, the production of high-power electromagnets is a very complicated
technological problem. Indeed, in order to be able to apply large currents, the winding should
be made of a thick wire. Otherwise, it may be strongly heated and even fused. Sometimes cop­
per pipes are used instead of wires, in which strong water jets circulate for the intense cooling
of the pipe walls through which the current flows. But with a winding made of a thick wire or
Chapter 18
pipe, it is impossible to obtain a large number of turns per unit length. On the other hand, the
utilization of a thin wire ensuring a considerable number of turns per metre does not allow one
to use large currents.5
The Soviet physicist P. L. Kapitza (1894-1984) proposed a witty way out of this situation.
He passed huge currents of 104 A through a solenoid for a very short time of about 0.01 s.
During this time, the solenoid winding could not be heated too strongly, and strong although
short-term magnetic fields were obtained. However, special instruments managed to register
the results of the experiments in which the effect of high-power magnetic field produced in a
solenoid on various substances was investigated.
In most technical applications, the number of ampere-turns in elec­
tromagnet windings does not exceed a few tens of thousands so that the
currents of several amperes and windings of moderate thickness are suffi­
cient. In the presence of an iron core, rather strong fields (with an induc­
tion of a few tesla) can be obtained in such electromagnets.
Most technical applications of electromagnets are based on their ability to
attract and hold iron objects. In these applications too, electromagnets
have considerable advantages over permanent magnets since the variation
of the current in the winding of an electromagnet makes it possible to
change its lifting force rapidly. The force with which a magnet attracts an
iron object sharply decreases with increasing the distance between the
magnet and iron. For this reason, the lifting force of an electromagnet is
conventionally determined by the force exerted by it on iron located in the
immediate vicinity of the magnet. In other words, the lifting force o f a
magnet is equal to the force required to separate from it a piece o f clean
soft iron that has been attracted to it.
To obtain an electromagnet with as high a lifting force as possible, we
must increase the contact area between the poles of the magnet and an iron
object being attracted (and known as armature), and try to make all
magnetic field lines pass only through the iron, i.e. eliminate all air gaps or
slits between the armature and the poles of the magnet. For this purpose,
their surfaces must be polished to match one another. These requirements
are met in the construction of a pot-shaped magnet shown in Fig. 368.
Such a magnet, fed by an accumulator or a flash-light battery, can hold a
load having a mass of 80-100 kg.
Electromagnets with a large lifting force are used in engineering for
various purposes. For example, electromagnet-driven cranes are used at
metallurgical and metal-working plants for carrying scrap iron or finished
tion of superconductors in the windings of magnets, which permits the application of strong
currents.
tromagnet body, 2 — winding fitted on the protrusion of the body, 3 — terminals of the win­
ding, 4 — armature.
articles. In metal-working plants, the machines with magnetic worktables
are used, to which an iron or steel object to be processed is attracted by
strong electromagnets. It is sufficient to switch on the current to fix the
item in any position on the worktable, or to switch the current off to
release it. To separate magnetic materials from nonmagnetic objects, like
in separating pieces of iron ore from gangue (magnetic separation),
magnetic separators are employed, in which a material to be purified passes
through a strong magnetic field of electromagnets. This field separates all
magnetic particles from the material.
Recently, high-power electromagnets with a huge areas of poles have
found new important applications in the construction of accelerators, viz.
special devices in which electrically charged particles (electrons and pro­
tons) are accelerated to very high velocities corresponding to the energy of
lOMO9 electronvolts. The beams of such particles flying at a very high
velocity are the main tools in the investigation of atomic structure (see
Vol. 3). Electromagnets used in these devices are huge constructions.
When a very strong magnetic field has to be obtained if only in a small
region, electromagnets with pole pieces in the form of truncated cones are
used. Then in a small space between them a field of a magnetic induction
up to 5 T can easily be obtained. Such electromagnets are mainly used in
physical laboratories for experiments with strong magnetic fields.
For special purposes, electromagnets of other types are also designed.
For example, physicians use electromagnets for removing iron filings
which have accidentally got into an eye.
Chapter 18
current in the electromagnet be comparatively weak?
To Exercise 18.11.4.
they are made of the same iron and have an identical number of ampere-turns?
Automatic Control
Electromagnets are widely used in various devices for transmitting signals
with the help of electric current. A current closed in some circuit makes an
electromagnet arranged at the other end of the curcuit attract the armature
and thus send a signal. Examples of such simple devices (buzzer inter­
rupter, electric bell or simple telegraph) are well known. In modern
engineering, much more complex devices of this type are used.
They include the so-called relays, viz. the devices which under the ac­
tion of very weak currents in their curcuits connect or disconnect circuits
bearing much stronger currents driving a motor or a mechanism. The struc­
tures of relays are very diverse.
A relay whose schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 370 has the following
structure. Control (weak) current passes through the winding of elec­
tromagnet 1, The iron core of the electromagnet attracts an iron plate 2-2'
closing at point 2 the circuit of operating (strong) current. Plate 2-2' is fix­
ed at point 2 ' around which it can rotate, and is stretched up by spring 3
which interrupts the contact at point 2 when the electromagnet does not
operate. The spring is fixed on plate 4. Its tension can be controlled to
match the smallest current at which the relay ‘operates*.
The sensitivity of modem relays is very high. There exist relays which
operate, i.e. switch on or off the operating current, even when the control
current is as weak as 10~4 or even 10“ 5 A. Such relays cannot connect cir­
cuits with very strong currents, and for this reason a few relays connected
in series are used. The first and most sensitive relay closes the current from
Operating current
circuit
An electromagnetic relay.
the circuit of the operating current which can be very strong.
an iron plate and 2 is a spring). Analyze the diagram and describe its operating principle.
Can this relay be used both with direct and alternating control current?
magnitude the doubled initial charge of the electroscope, the deflection of the leaves
decreases. If the charge transferred from the glass to the electroscope exceeds in magnitude
the doubled initial charge, the deflection of the leaves increases. 1.4.2. The brass rod is elec­
trostatically charged in both cases. However, if the rod touches the hand, the emerging
charges leak to the Earth through the body of the experimenter. But if the rod is covered by
rubber (good insulator), the charges remain on the rod. 1.4.3. It is sufficient to draw the
charged insulator through the incandescent gas surrounding the burner. This gas conducts
current, and hence the charge will leak through the gas cloud and through the body of the ex­
perimenter. 1.4.4. Being rubbed against the table, the fur is electrostatically charged, and
hence electric charges also appear on the body of the experimenter holding the fur. 1.4.5. The
silk having been rubbed against glass should be placed into the cylinder of an electroscope
should be carried out only with a warm and dried sheet of paper since only under these condi­
tions paper is a good insulator. 1.8.1. When the body is brought close to the ball of the elec­
troscope, charges are induced on the electroscope rod: the charges unlike those on the body on
the outer end of the rod and the charges like the charge on the body on the inner end.
Therefore, if the electroscope initially bore a charge like that on the body, the total charge of
the leaves (the initial charge plus the induced charge) is larger than the initial charge, and the
deflection of the leaves is larger. If the electroscope initially bore a charge unlike that on
the body, the deflection of the leaves is decreased. 1.8.2. When we bring to the electroscope
the positively charged glass rod, the electrons move from the inner end of the electroscope
rod to its outer end. If we touch the electroscope rod by the finger and then remove the
glass rod, the electrons move in the opposite direction. 1.8.3. The deflection of the leaves
will be smaller since the charge of the electroscope will induce an unlike charge on the part of
the metal body which is nearer to it, and this charge will reduce the deflection of the leaves (see
Exercise 1.8.1). 1.8.4. As the negative charge approaches the electroscope, the induced
charge of the leaves, which is equal to the sum of the initial positive charge and the increasing
because an unlike charge is induced on the hand. 1.11.1. 0.1 N. 1.11.2. 5.2°. 1.11.3. 66 nC.
F = (1/47re0)(e2/ r 2). This force produces the acceleration a = v2/r = w2r (see Vol. 1). Con­
sequently, the rotational speed of the electron about the nucleus must be such that the equality
rotational speed n = w/lir = 4.9 x 1014 s-1 . 2.1.1. In the former case, a like induced
charge remains on the wads of cotton and weakens the attraction between the charge of the
rod and the unlike induced charge. In the latter case, the like induced charge leaks through the
table, and the attraction is stronger. 2.3.1. 9 kV/m. 2.3.2. 45 kV/m. 2.3.3. 3 mN.
where the negative charge is located (cf. Fig. 32 corresponding to a similar case for a positive
charge). 2.8.2. 0. 2.8.3. 0. 2.8.4. A flag, like a paper strip (Sec. 2.1) or any other elongated
body, tends to arrange itself along the field. 2.9.1. Common features: (a) for electric fields,
the force of interaction between two point charges is inversely proportional to the squared
separation (Coulomb’s law): the same is true for the masses of material points (Newtons’s law
of gravitation); (b) the work done over closed paths is always equal to zero for both fields, i.e.
these fields are conservative; (c) as a consequence, there exists potential difference both in the
electric field and in the gravitational field. Different properties: (a) in electric field, there exist
charges of two signs, while in the gravitational field there is no negative mass; (b) this leads to
a few corollaries: a body, for example, can be electrically neutral (uncharged) and then it does
tionally neutral bodies since any material body creates a gravitational field in the surrounding
space, i.e. acts on surrounding bodies. 2.12.1. 1 N. 2.12.2. The force is equal to 2.08 x
force acting on the ion. 2.13.1. These equipotential surfaces are shown in Fig. 372. It is
essential here that the surface of the point charge and the surface of the Earth are equipoten­
tial surfaces, and hence the field lines are normal to the surface of the Earth and to the surface
of the point charge. 2.13.2. See Fig. 373. 2.13.3. The field will not change. 2.15.1. The glass
To Exercise 2.13.1.
is polarized in the electric field of the charged electroscope: an unlike charge appears on the
part closest to the electroscope and a like charge on the farther part. The unlike charge which
is closer to the electroscope produces a stronger effect on it and reduces the deflection of its
leaves. 2.16.1. No. 2.16.2. No, since an unlike charge induced by the body will now remain on
the electroscope. 2.16.3. It will not change. 2.17.1. It will measure the potential difference
between the points at which the candles are located. 2.18.1. A human body is a conductor,
and hence its surface in a field where charges are in equilibrium must be an equipotential sur­
face. There cannot be a potential difference between its separate points (head and feet).
Before a person comes to a given point, the field has the form shown in Fig. 374a, its lines be­
ing directed vertically downwards and equipotential surfaces being horizontal planes. A
potential difference of 200 V actually exists between points A and B. When the person ap­
pears in this space, the electric field is distorted and has the form shown schematically in
ty of the human body so that one of these surfaces coincides with the surface of the human
body, and the potential difference between points A and B turns zero. This is due to a
redistribution of charges on the human body, but this displacement of charges (electric cur­
rent) is very small and occurs during such a short time that it is not perceived by the person.
On the other hand, there is no charge equilibrium when a person touches the poles of a battery
or terminals of a circuit, and current flows through the human body for a long time. This cur28—7185
Answers and Solutions
To Exercise 2.18.1.
rent is strong enough to cause the well-known unpleasant sensations. 2.18.2. About
equal magnitude will be induced on the surfaces of the sphere such that the charge on the inner
surface is of the opposite sign, and the charge on the outer surface is of the same sign as that at
the centre. Outside the sphere, the resultant effect from the charge at the centre and the charge
on the inner surface is zero, and only the charge on the outer surface will act as if the charge were
concentrated at the centre. Therefore, the presence of the hollow sphere will not change the
situation. If, however, the sphere is earthed, there will be no charge on the outer surface, the
field outside the sphere will be absent, and the load will not be deflected. 2.20.2. Inside the
metal mesh (closed cavity) the electric field is equal to zero, and hence an electric spark cannot
strike anywhere. If, however, the cavity contains a tube which is not connected with it and
goes beyond the cavity, a potential difference may emerge between the tube and the cavity
former case, the charges removed from the belt by brush 5 would not move to the outer sur­
face of the sphere but would remain at the same place, and no long-term charge transfer from
the belt to the sphere would be possible. In the latter case, brush 3, the belt and the surface of
the sphere would form a single equipotential surface, and no long-term charge transfer from
brush 3 to the belt would be possible. 2.22.1. 1 pC. 2.22.2. This can be done, for example,
with the help of an electrometer. For this purpose, the shell of the electrometer must be in­
sulated and connected to one of the balls, and the electrometer rod must be connected to the
other ball. 2.22.3. The potential difference between separate parts of the bird’s body (its
paws) will be small, and the entire body will be under a high tension. 2.23.1. Yes, it can, and
the charges will be identical. If the experimenter then takes the charged Leyden jar by the rod
and puts it on the table, the jar will be discharged through his body and the table, and he will
feel a shock. 2.23.2. The charge on the Leyden jar will be very small in this case. The charges
of both signs will be induced on the insulated plate, but none of these charges can leave the
plate. It will be electrically neutral as a whole, and the Leyden jar will not be a capacitor.
sulating bench, the jar cannot discharge since there is an insulator (bench) in the path of the
current, and the current will not pass through the experimenter's body. 2.24.1. In the former
case, 16 times. 2.24.2. 40 V, 80 V. 2.24.3. 15 /xC. 2.24.4. 150 V. 2.24.5. In equal parts.
filament, the current decreases as the filament temperature increases since the resistance of
metals increases with temperature. In the case of a carbon filament, the opposite dependence
is observed. 3.10.2. 2000 °C. 3.10.3. 12.1 0. 3.12.1. The triangles acb and feb are similar,
and hence R /R x = fb/ab. The similarity of the triangles abd and afe gives R /R 2 = af/ab =
\/R x + 1/R 1% QED. 3.12.2. 20 0, 11 A. 3.14.1. 10 lamps should be connected in series.
lamps or 28 8 V lamps should be taken. If one lamp of the garland burns out, the remaining
lamps will not glow. The garland can be repaired by cutting out the burnt lamp and connect­
ing the obtianed free ends of the wire. The bare wire ends should necessarily be insulated by an
insulating band or a tube of an insulating material. If several lamps have been cut out of the
garland, the resistance of the remaining lamps becomes so low that a strong current passes
through the garland, and the remaining lamps burn out soon. 3.14.5. (a) 110 V, (b) 22 V,
rent, we increase the current in the circuit and in the leads, and hence the potential drop U Ir in them, and this causes a corresponding decrease in the voltage across the bulbs. The
brightness of the bulbs gradually increases since the resistance of the iron increases with
its temperature, and hence the potential drop caused by its switching on decreases.
of the carbon filament decreases with temperature. For this reason, the two lamps (with a
metallic and with a carbon filament) having the same resistance in the hot state, have different
resistances in the cold state (it is small for the metallic filament and large for the carbon one).
This explains the indicated difference. 3.15.1. Yes, it can. The wires between which the
voltage is to be measured should be connected to the terminals of the electrometer, which are
connected to its shell and leaves. The instrument must be graduated by using a few voltages
determined beforehand. 3.16.1. 1 V. 3.16.2. 10 mA. 3.16.3. 12 kfl; the resistor should be
connected in series with the voltmeter; the sensitivity will not change. 3.16.4. 440 fl.
sumes a larger current; the 15 W bulb has a higher resistance. The resistances for the 15 W
and 100 W bulbs are 3272 (1 and 48411, and the currents through them are 0.068 A and
amounts of heat liberated in each of them is proportional to their resistances. The resistance
of the leads is hundreds of times lower than the resistance of the bulb. 4.3.7. In the former
case, nickeline wires are heated to a larger extent since their resistance is higher than that of
copper wires. In the latter case, copper wires will be heated stronger since a larger current will
pass through them. 4.3.8. The bulbs having the same power and rated for the same voltage
voltage of 220 V, the voltage will be equally distributed between them. Each bulb will be
under a voltage of 110 V, and will glow normally. If the rated powers of the bulbs are dif­
ferent, the smaller resistance will correspond to the bulb rated for the higher power. If we
connect such bulbs in series, the current through them will be the same, while the voltage
under nominal conditions, while the less powerful lamp will be overheated. In the case under
consideration, the voltage across the 25 W bulb will be four times as high as the voltage across
the 100 W bulb and will be equal to 176 V. This bulb will flash too brightly and will be burnt
out very soon, while the 100 W bulb, the voltage across which will be 44 V, will hardly glow.
smaller and, with the same rated power for each lamp, the power of this garland will be lower
than that of the garland of 6 V lamps. With a series connection, it will operate with
overheating and will be damaged soon (see Exercise 4.3.8); (c) yes, this can be done.
cannot. 4.5.1. 12 min. 4.5.2. 1.76 copeck. 4.5.3. 403 J. 4.5.4. 200 W; yes, it will; 900 W.
Answers and Solutions
To Exercise 4.9.3.
wires, the electrolysis of water will take place, and bubbles of gas (oxygen and hydrogen) will
be liberated at the wires. 5.2.2. Since in electrolysis of water the volume of liberated hydrogen
is twice as large as the volume of liberated oxygen, the negative pole will be that at which more
gas is liberated. 5.2.3. The electrochemical equivalent for lead is 1.074 x 10“ 6 kg/C, for
sodium it is 0.238 x 10“ 7 kg/C and for aluminium it is 0.933 x 10“ 7 kg/C. 0.1933 kg of
lead, 0.0428 kg of sodium and 0.0168 kg of aluminium will be liberated. 5.2.4. The elec­
trochemical equivalent for chlorine is 1.045 x 10” 8 x 35.45/1.008 = 0.368 x 10“ 6 kg/C.
energy. During collisions, this kinetic energy of ordered motion is transformed into the energy
of random motion, viz. heat. 5.3.2. The wires are insulated in this way since the moisture on
wires always contains dissolved electrolytes and is a conductor. 5.3.3. The moisture on hands
contains a NaCl solution and is an electrolyte. For this reason, it ensures a better contact be­
tween the skin and the wires than when the skin is dry. 5.4.1. The negative pole. 5.7.1. An
electrolyte is neutral since each its volume contains the same number of positive and negative
charges, so that its charge on the average is zero. 5.7.2. The ionization in an electrolyte is
maintained by the thermal motion of ions and molecules. 5.9.1. 3.0 kW; 15m2. 5.9.2. About
polarization of the cell will be decreased. 6.6.1. 80 h. 6.8.1.2.2 A. 6.8.2.0.6 V.
of a source. For this its shell should be connected to one pole of the source and the rod with
the leaves should be connected to the other pole. 6.8.6. The reading of the electrometer will
change: the larger the capacitance of the capacitor, the smaller the reading. 6.8.7. 2 V.
across the terminals is equal to zero. For different internal resistances, the voltage will differ
from zero. 6.9.5. There is no current in the circuit. The voltage across the terminals of each
cell is equal to its emf. 6.9.6. 1 A. 6.9.7. 160 A. 6.9.8. 0.8 0.6.9.9. 1.1 V; 1 0.6.9.10. 10^ 0.
be reduced by half. The capacitance of the battery will be twice as high as for a single ac­
cumulator. 6.9.18. The emf will increase twice. The internal resistance will also be increased
twice. The capacitance of the battery will be the same as for a single accumulator.
tron number density at the periphery will become higher than the normal value. Therefore, the
edges of the disk will have a negative charge, while its centre will be charged positively. It
should be noted that these charges are very small and cannot play any role in practice.
acceleration between the anode and the cathode, electrons acquire a kinetic energy which is
transferred to the anode and is converted into heat when they collide with the anode.
of the tubes electrons were emitted by the cold electrode (anode), which is impossible.
glass flask and impart to its inner surface a negative charge, i.e. the charge unlike that of the
electroscope, which reduces the deflection of the leaves. If the tin foil bears a negative charge,
the electrons do not get to the walls of the flask. 8.3.1. The breakdown voltage decreases with
the decrease in gas pressure. This is due to the fact that at a long mean free path, ions can ac­
quire the kinetic energy required for the ionization at a smaller electric field strength.
spark) emerges in the surrounding medium (air), and the air loses its insulating properties.
cause a corona discharge. 8.5.3. A corona emerges near points, and ions appear in the air.
The ions bearing the charge unlike that on the disc move to it and neutralize its charge, while
like charges move to the point and charge it. 8.7.1. The aerial serves as a lightning conductor
which must be thoroughly earthed during a thunderstorm. 8.8.1. This should be done since
the temperature of the positive piece of carbon (crater) is higher than that of the negative one,
and for this reason it bums out sooner. 8.8.2. llOOkJ; 0.2 fi. 8.13.2. 1.0 x 108 m/s.
the residence time between the capacitor plates is the same for both rays, the cathode rays will
be deflected to a larger extent. 8.16.1. Under the action of electric field, heavy ions of the gas
hit the cathode and destroy it. 8.17.1. 1.6 x 107 and 1.9 x 107 m/s. 8.17.2. By 0.5 cm. A
unstable since a smallest deviation from this position will give rise to the forces tending to in­
crease this deviation. If, for example, we slightly shift the ball downwards, the force of gravity
will remain unchanged, while the force of magnetic attraction will decrease. The resultant will
be directed downwards and will make the ball fall. Similarly, it is sufficient to slightly move
the ball upwards to produce the upward resultant of the force of gravity and the force of
magnetic attraction, which makes the ball be attracted to the magnet. 10.1.2. The motion will
occur with increasing acceleration because the force acting on the cube increases as it ap­
proaches the magnet. 10.2.1. Break the needle into two pieces and see whether its ends will at­
tract each other. 10.2.2. Arrange the bars in the form of T. If the bar facing the other with its
end is a magnet, the attraction will be noticeable. If the other bar is magnetized, no attraction
will be observed since it touches its neighbour at the neutral region. 10.4.1. In the former case,
S \N S IS To Exercise 10.4.1.
the poles are arranged like in Fig. 377a, while in the latter case the arrangement of the poles is
as in Fig. 311b. A needle will always have four poles separated by three neutral regions.
induction of the resultant field will lie in the vertical plane perpendicular to the meridian. It
forms with the vertical an angle of 53°8' whose tangent is equal to 4/3. The induction of the
resultant field is 0.005 T. 11.4.2. 0.0114 T. 11.4.3. 0.0082 T. 11.4.4. 0.0087 T, 0.005 T.
Answers and Solutions
zero. In the second case, the magnetic induction at point O is perpendicular to the plane of the
parallelogram and is directed towards the observer. 12.1.3. Vector B at point O lies in the
plane parallel to both straight lines ab and cd and forms the angles of 45° with the planes pass­
ing through e f and each of the straight lines ab and cd. 12.1.5. At the centre of the turns, vec­
tor B lies in the plane normal to the planes of both turns,*and forms the angles of 45° with
these planes. 12.2.2. We obtain two windings arranged near each other and bearing opposite
currents. The magnetic fields of these currents neutralize each other. 12.2.3. The south pole
of the solenoid faces the observer. 12.2.4. The right end is directed to the North.
of the solenoid will be annihilated. 12.3.3. The magnetic field increases three-fold. The cur­
rent in the solenoid can be reduced to 1/3 of the initial value. 12.3.4. (a) 3.77 mT,
the magnetic induction will decrease by a factor of 25. 13.1.1. The magnetization of vertical
objects in the magnetic field of the Earth indicates that the magnetic induction of this field has
a vertical component, i.e. does not lie in the horizontal plane. The north pole will be below
and the south pole above (in the northern hemisphere). 13.1.2. The north pole emerges on the
end of the bar facing the North, and the south pole, on the other end. 13.1.3. The ship is
magnetized so that the north pole emerges at the bottom and the south pole, in the upper part.
Since the field of the current must balance the magnetic field of the ship, it must have the op­
posite direction, i.e. the north pole must be in the upper part. Therefore, the current in the
loop must have the counterclockwise direction (when viewed from above). The direction of
the current is of no importance. 13.1.4. The pan with the rod will be deflected downwards.
and hence the torque acting on the magnetic needle is also small. 13.2.1. A load of mass
where / is the length of the needle. It is balanced by the torque due to the field, which is equal
to Bpm sin 30°, where pm is the magnetic moment of the needle (the angle between the direc­
tion of the field and the needle in this case is equal to 60° - 30° = 30°). When the needle is in
the horizontal position, the torque produced by the load of an unknown mass m2 is equal
to m2g (1/2). It is balanced by the torque Bpm sin 60°. Thus, we obtain two equations:
mxg (1/2) cos 30° = Bpm sin 30° and m2g (1/2) = Bpm sin 60°. The required mass m2 can easily
be found from these equations. 13.2.2. Since the needle of the inclinometer can rotate in the
plane of its dial, while the magnetic forces lie in the plane of the magnetic meridian, the needle
will always arrange itself in the direction t)f the projection of these forces on the plane of the
inclinometer dial. The angle a formed by the needle with the horizontal plane is determined
from the relation tan a = Bv/(B h cos 0), where 0 is the angle of rotation of the inclinometer
plane relative to the plane of the magnetic meridian. Hence it follows that for 0 = 0, the angle
a = /. As angle 0 increases, angle a decreases. For 0 = 90°, angle a = 0, i.e. the needle is ar­
ranged in the vertical position. 13.2.3. The needle of the compass having a horizontal axis will
be in the neutral equilibrium. The needle indicating the inclination will be arranged in the ver­
tical position. 14.2.1. Conductor ab will arrange itself so that it is parallel to cd and the cur­
rent in it has the opposite direction. The position in which conductor ab is arranged so that it
is parallel to cd and the current in them has the same direction is also an equilibrium position
for conductor ab, but now the equilibrium is unstable. 14.2.2. (a) The force has the horizon­
tal eastward direction, (b) the force is inclined to the horizontal at an angle 90° - / (is
perpendicular to the magnetic field of the Earth) and has the upward direction.
of two parallel segments in contact. In the case (a), its area has the maximum value for a given
perimeter, while in the case (b) it has the minimum value. 14.3.2. Each turn of a spiral is
similar to a magnetized sheet. All the like poles of these sheets face in the same direction and
hence attract one another. 14.3.3. When the current is switched on, the spiral is contracted, its
end leaves the bowl with mercury, and the curcuit is disconnected. Then under the action of
elastic forces the spiral is stretched again, its end enters the bowl with mercury and connects
the circuit, and so on. This device resembles a hammer break and could be used for the same
purpose. 14.3.4. The iron is pulled into the coil because it is magnetized by its Held. In a
uniform field, only a torque acts on the magnet. The forces causing a translatory motion ap­
pear only in a nonuniform field (see Sec. 14.3). Therefore, if we placed the iron into the coil
where the field is uniform, the iron would not move. 14.3.5. The current should be switched
off at the moment when the projectile acquires the maximum velocity, i.e. when it is in the
uniform field region where the force acting on it is equal to zero. If the current is switched on
permanently, near the other end of the coil the projectile gets into the region where the field
attenuates. Since the forces acting on it always tend to pull it into the regions where the
magnetic induction of the field is larger, the projectile will be decelerated here. At a certain
point, its velocity vanishes, and the projectile starts to move in the opposite direction.
Positive and negative ions are deflected in opposite directions, (b) ions carrying a larger
charge are deflected stronger, (c) ions having a larger molecular mass are deflected to a
smaller extent. 14.5.3. Electrons will move in a circle since the force acting on them, and
hence their acceleration are perpendicular to the velocity of motion at each instant of time. The
velocity in this case has a constant magnitude (see Vol. 1). 14.5.4. If we look against the elec­
tron beam, the electrons and negative ions are deflected to the left from the observer, while
positive ions are deflected to the right. 14.5.6. The disc rotates counterclockwise if we look
from the side of the battery. 15.1.1. The magnetic flux through the turns of coil II increases as
the iron rod is pulled into coil I since the iron is magnetized by the field of this coil. 15.1.2. No
current will be induced since in any position of the frame, the magnetic field lines are parallel
to its plane and the magnetic flux through it is zero. 15.1.3. The maximum emf is induced
when the motor car moves eastwards, its magnitude being the larger the higher the velocity of
the motor car. 15.1.4. No current is induced since equal and opposite emfis appear in both ax­
les. 15.1.5. The magnetic field accompanying the lightning current induces strong directed
currents in conductors. 15.2.1. Circular magnetic field lines due to the current in conductor a
pierce the induction circuit formed by conductor b and the wires connecting it to the
galvanometer. As the current in conductor a increases, the current induced in conductor b is
opposite to the primary current, and with decreasing the primary current, the induced current
has the same direction as the primary one. 15.2.2. The current will be directed from the plane
of the figure towards the observer. If the magnetic field or the direction of motion of the con­
ductor is reversed, the direction of current will also be reversed. The right-hand rule can be
formulated as follows: 'if the right hand is put on the conductor so that the field lines enter
the palm and the outstretched thumb indicates the direction of motion of of the conductor,
the four stretched fingers will indicate the direction of the induced current*. 15.2.3. When the
rod is drawn into the coil, the current in coil II is directed against the current in coil I. When
the rod is pulled out, the two currents will have the same direction. 15.4.1. In the case (a) the
induction is due only to the horizontal component of the magnetic field of the Earth, in the
case (b) only to the vertical component, and in the case (c) to the entire field. The strongest
induced current will be observed in the case (c). With an inclination exceeding 45°, the ver­
tical component of the field is larger than the horizontal component, and the current in the
case (b) will be stronger than in the case (a). 15.4.2. ( j) 6 x 10“ 6 Wb, 0.24 V; (6) 1.04 x
walls during its rotation in the magnetic field. The field acting on these currents tends to
Answers and Solutions
decelerate the rotation. For this reason, in the presence of the field a larger torque must be ap­
plied to the cylinder, i.e. higher energy must be spent than in the absence of the field. This ad­
ditional energy is just spent on heating the cylinder and water. 15.6.2. The pendulum is
decelerated by the forces exerted by the magnetic field on Foucault currents induced in the
pendulum as it passes through the nonuniform region of the field. 15.6.3. The coil is
decelerated by the same forces as the pendulum in Exercise 15.6.2. 15.6.4. When the cube is
suspended at hook /, the insulating layers between copper sheets prevent the emergence of
Foucault currents that decelerate the rotation. When the cube is suspended at hook 2,
Foucault currents can freely pass over the vertical plane. 16.3.1. Iron and other ferromagnetic
materials are always pulled into the regions where the field is stronger (see Sec. 15.5).
Paramagnetic materials obviously behave similarly. Conversely, diamagnetics are pulled into
the regions where the field is weaker. In the case under consideration, the field is stronger in
the lower region where the poles come closer to each other, and is weaker in the upper part.
This explains the phenomena described in the exercise. 16.3.2. The paramagnetic liquid is
drawn into the region of the maximum induction of the field, while the diamagnetic liquid
is pulled out of this region.
the Earth. The corrections are determined by the magnetic properties of steel. 16.5.2. The
distorting effect of steel and iron objects on the ship would deteriorate very accurate
measurements of the magnetic field of the Earth despite the corrections that could be in­
troduced. 16.6.1. Hardened steel is most suitable for permanent magnets, while soft iron fits
for electromagnets with a high speed control. 16.6.2. An electromagnet crane cannot be used
for this purpose since as the iron is heated (approaches the Curie point), its permeability
decreases. A red-hot ingot is magnetized very weakly and the force attracting it to the elec­
tromagnet is very small. 17.4.1. 0.06 A; 0.085 A. 17.4.2. 10 A. 17.4.3. 3.55 A. 17.4.4. 20 A.
switched on, the emf of self-induction opposes the emf of the circuit, and when the circuit is
disconnected, it has the same direction as the emf in the circuit. The spark is brighter when a
greater current is switched off and when the inductance of the circuit is larger. 17.6.4. A
stronger spark is observed when the electromagnet is disconnected because of its greater in­
ductance. 17.7.1. 25 H. 17.7.2. The number of turns should be reduced or the iron core
should be removed for this purpose. 17.7.3. Yes, it does. 17.9.1. 1.38 A. 17.9.2. 0.175 A.
in reactive resistance. 17.14.1.55 V; 110 V; 330 V; 2200 V. 17.14.2. Ul2 = 73.3 V;
Ul4 = 440 V; Ul5 = 733.3 V; t/23 = 146.7 V; Uu = 366.7 V; U25 = 660 V; U34 = 220 V;
u)s = 513.3 V; l/4J = 293.3 V. 17.14.3. 2.4 A. 17.15.1. (a) 85 mm2, 36.78 kg; (b)
direction twice during a period, the total number of current reversals is 600.18.1.2. When the
teeth of the rotor are against the teeth of the stator, the magnetic flux produced by excitation
coils I and piercing the inductance coils II is larger than when the rotor teeth move away from
the stator teeth. Thus, the magnetic flux through coils II continuously changes during the
rotation of the rotor, and this is the reason behind the induced current. 18.2.1. The stator of
an a.c. generator contains the armature in which an alternating current is induced, while the
stator of a d.c. generator contains the inductor with a direct current in its windings. 18.3.1. In
a series generator, a very large current passes through the excitation winding. Therefore, it
must be made of a thick wire. On the other hand, sufficiently large magnetic induction and
magnetic flux are obtained with a large current even for a small number of turns. In a shunt
generator, only a small fraction of the current is branched through the excitation winding. In
order to obtain the needed large number of ampere-turns for a small current, a large number
of wire turns is required, and the winding can be made of a thin wire. 18.3.2. A series
generator cannot be started without a load since in this case the circuit of excitation windings
is disconnected, there is no current through them, and hence the magnetic flux in the
generator will not be increased. A shunt generator can be started without a load since the cir­
cuit of its armature is permanently connected to the excitation windings. 18.3.3. If the direc­
tion of rotation of the generator is reversed, the induced current will produce a magnetic field
opposite to the residual magnetization of the inductor. The inductor will be demagnetized,
and the generator will not operate. 18.3.4. A current from an external source (accumulator
battery) should be passed for a short time through the excitation windings. This current
should be directed so as to magnetize the inductor in the direction corresponding to the in­
dicated direction of rotation for the generator. 18.7.1. When the motor is started, the arm of
the rheostat is in the extreme right position. In this case, the section /?start of the rheostat is in­
troduced into the circuit of the armature and serves as a starter rheostat. The excitation coil is
short-circuited through a metal band. Therefore, when the arm of the rheostat is on this band,
the motor rotates at a minimum speed. By moving the arm of the rheostat to the left, we first
switch off /?start from the armature circuit, and then connect an increasingly large fraction of
the resistance of /?control to the excitation circuit. The magnetic flux is then decreased, and the
rotational speed increases. 18.7.2. Since only a small fraction of the current supplied to the
motor passes through the excitation winding, while its major part passes through the ar­
mature, the rheostat made of the thick wire with a low resistance should be used as the starter
rheostat, while the rheostat made of the thin wire with a high resistance should be used as a
rheostatic controller. 18.7.3. When a motor is started without or with a small load, the cur­
rent in the armature is very weak, and the emf induced in the armature is almost equal to the
voltage of the main circuit. In a series motor, the armature current passes through the excita­
tions windings. For a large emf to be induced with such a small current in the armature, the
motor must rotate at a very high speed (runaway of the motor). This is not observed in a shunt
motor since in this case the current in the excitation windings and the magnetic flux in the
motor weakly depend on the current in the armature, and the required emf is always induced
at a moderate rotational speed of the motor. 18.11.1. It is necessary either to connect a
rheostat in series with the electromagnet or to use a pull-out core. 18.11.2. A large number of
turns of a thin wire should be wound. 18.11.4. The electromagnet with flat pole pieces has a
larger lifting force. 18.12.1. Yes, it can.
Gravitational constant
Acceleration of free fall (standard value)
Velocity of light in vacuum
Permeability of vacuum
G = 6.6720 x 10"11 N-m2/kg2
g = 9.80665 m /s2
c = 2.99792458 x 10® m/s
H0 = 4* x 10" 7 H /m =
e0 = 8.85418782 x 10"l2 F/m
me = 9.109534 x 10” 31 kg
m = 1.6726485 x 10“ 27 kg
e = 1.6021892 x 10"19C
e/m e = 1.7588047 x 1011 C/kg
h = 6.626176 x 10"34 J s
N a = 6.022045 x 1023 m ole"1
k = 1.380662 x 10"23 J/K
R = 8.31441 J/(m oleK )
F = 96.48456 x 103 C/mole
Permittivity of vacuum
Rest mass of electron
Rest mass of proton
Elementary charge
Ratio of electron charge to its mass
Planck’s constant
Avogadro’s number
Boltzmann’s constant
Universal gas constant
Faraday’s constant
Volume of a mole of ideal
gas under standard conditions
V0 = 22.41383 x 10” 3 m3/mole
Factor
Name of prefix
hexapentateragigamegakilohectodecadecicentimillimicronanopicofemtoatto-
Symbol
da a.c. circuit, 362ff
accumulator(s) 164ff
ammeter, 102, 161
a.c., 352f
graduation of 147
resistance of, 121
Ampdre, A. M., 248, 250, 255
anode, 136
Arago, D. F., 244, 248, 320
armature, 386
aurora borealis, 299f
barretter(s), 228
Birkeland, O., 300
brush(es), 386
capacitance, 32, 73ff
unites of, 74, 90
capacitor(s), 73ff, 90
connection of, 80f
parallel-plate, 79, 87f
types of, 77f
cathode, 136
cathode-ray oscillograph, 224f
cathode-ray tube, 223
cell,
Daniell, 155f, 158ff, 167
galvanic, 153ff
depolarization of, 163
short-circuiting, 170
Leclanch*, 163f
voltaic, 155
Weston standard, 156
chemical equivalent, 139
commutator, 391
conduction,
in electrolytes, 140f
electron, in metals, 183f
in gases,
induced, 192
intrinsic, 192
conductivity, 108, 226f
conductor(s), 13ff
coefficient, temperature resistance, llOf
constant,
Avogadro, 143
electric, 32
Faraday, 139f, 143
magnetic, 326
Coulomb, Ch., 29ff, 252
Curie point, 337
current(s),
Ampere molecular, 283
Foucault, 318ff
induced, 302ff
direction of, 308, 313
saturation, 195
current source(s), connection of, 172ff
dark cathode space, 208
diamagnetics, 326ff
dielectric permittivity, 81 f
relative, 82
diode, vacuum, 219f
discharge, electric
arc, 204ff
applications of, 207f
corona, 200f
applications of, 201 f
glow, 208
spark, 196f, 199
earthing, 62
Edison, T., 130
effect(s),
of current
magnetic, 224f
thermal, 123ff
Peltier, 425
photoelectric, 28
extrinsic, 229
intrinsic, 229
Eichenwald, A., 295
electric charge(s),
elementary, 20, 143f
mobility of, 226
units of, 3If
electric conductance, 108
electric conductivity, units of, 108
electric current,
alternating, 34Iff
amplitude of, 347ff
through capacitor, 357f
through inductance coil, 359f
frequency of, 347ff
magnitude of, 35Iff
phase of, 347ff
Testification of, 38Iff
direct, 90ff, 99, 341
direction of, 98
effects of, 96ff
sources of, 92
in electrolytes, 136ff
in gases, 192ff
in metals, 183ff
in semiconductors, 226ff
steady-state, 99
three-phase, 402
delta connection, 405
star connection, 404
units of, 99
electric field strength, 37f, 40, 43f, 84, 258
units of, 38, 56
electric motor(s),
d.c., 415ff
series, 422
shunt, 419
efficiency of, 424
three-phase, 407ff
electric probe, 64
electric resistance, 105, 187
internal, of source, 168
temperature dependence of, 109ff
Index
units of, 105
of wires, 106f
electric wiring, 134f
electrochemical equivalent, 138f
electrolysis, 136, 142, 144f
technical applications, 148f
electrolyte(s), 136
electrolytic dissociation, 146
electromagnetic induction, 302ff
electromagnets, 426ff
application of, 428
horse-shoe, 427
pot-shaped, 429
electrometer, 58ff
electromotive force (emf), 92f, 154, 156ff,
alternating, 341
induced, 314ff
electron(s), 20, 95
conduction, 21, 183f
free, 21
electroplating, 150
electroscope, 1Iff, 17ff, 58f, 61
electrostatic charging, 19
by induction, 25ff
by light, 28
electrostatic induction, 46f
energy, ionization, 228
equipotential surface(s), 53ff
escape potential, 188
experiment(s),
Coulomb, 30, 252f
Faraday, 59, 328ff, 341
Mandelshtam-Papaleksi, 184
Oersted, 244ff
Rowland-Eichenwald, 274
Faraday, M., 68, 137f
Faraday’s cage, 68f
Faraday’s cylinder, 71
ferromagnetic(s), 326
properties of, 333
field(s),
electric, 34ff
composition of, 39f
in conductors, 40f
of the Earth, 65
energy of, 87
graphic representation of, 41
in insulators, 40f
field(s),
magnetic, 246, 252, 257ff
composition of, 26If
of current, 266ff
of the Earth, 276ff
of moving charges, 274f
of solenoid, 269
uniform, 44
field lines, 42f, 45ff, 54
force,
coercive, 336
electric, 11
Lorentz, 295ff, 299, 317f
magnetic, 245
Foucault, J., 319
Franklin, B., 199
frequency, cyclic, 348
fuse(s), 132
Galvani, L., 152f
galvanometer, 101 f, 153, 293f
ballistic, 322
galvanoplasty, 150f
generator(s), 93f
a.c., 386ff
chemical, 152ff
compound, 402
d.c., 390ff
*reversibility of, 425
efficiency of, 424f
induction, 341 f, 387
self-excited, 398f
series, 398ff
shunt, 399f
thermal, 152ff
three-phase, 403f
Van de Graaff, 77
Gilbert, W., 244, 252
Helmholts, G., 144
Henry, J., 356
hole, 230
hysteresis, 336
impedance, 361 f
incandescent lamp, 130f
inductance, 356ff
units of, 356
inductor, 386
insulator(s), 13ff
ion(s), 21, 95, 140ff
anion, 142
cation, 142
ionization, 192
collision, 198
ionization potential, 198
Joule, J., 123f
Kapitza, P. L., 428
kenotron(s), 220, 384
Langmuir, I., 131
law, Ampere, 286
Coulomb, 29ff, 34f, 84
of electromagnetic induction, 312ff
Faraday, of electrolysis, 194
first, 137, 146, 148
second, 138f, 146
Joule, 123f
Lenz, 308ff, 319f, 343
Newton third, 311, 320
Ohm, for conductor(s), 104f, 113f, 119, 132,
Ohm, for alternating current, 360f
for closed circuit, 167ff
Lenz, E., 123f
Leyden jar, 77f, 152
lightning, 199
lightning conductor, 203
Lodygin, A. N., 130
Lomonosov, M. V., 199
Lorentz, H., 295, 298
magnet(s), 239ff
poles of, 242
magnetic anomalies, 281
magnetic declination, 278
magnetic dip, 279
magnetic field lines, 262, 267
magnetic field strength, 2721, 333
units of, 273
magnetic flux, 306f, 315
units of, 316
magnetic induction, 257ff
measurement of, 260, 264
units of, 259f
magnetic meridian, 278
plane of, 278
magnetic moment, 258f, 334
magnetic prospecting, 281
magnetic protection, 33Iff
magnetic saturation, 335
magnetic storm, 282
magnetization, 254, 334
residual, 336
magneto, 387
Mandelshtam, L., 184
metal(s), structure of, 186
Oersted, H., 244ff, 255
Ohm, G., 104
oscillograph, 345ff
cathode-ray, 347
two-loop, 350
Papaleksi, N., 184
paramagnetic(s), 326ff
permeability, 273
of iron, 322, 324, 326ff
Petrov, V. P., 204
phase shift, 367ff
photoconduction, 229
p-n junction, 234
polarization,
of dielectrics, 85ff
of electrodes, 161 ff
positive column, 208
potential difference, 5If, 55, 58f, 73f, 82,
measurement of, 63
units of, 52
power of current, 125, 372f
units of, 125
power factor, 373
ray(s),
canal (positive), 217
cathode, 210ff, 247
properties of, 212ff
Index
reactance,
capacitive, 361
inductive, 361
recombination, 194
rectifier(s),
diode, 384
full-wave, 383
half-wave, 382
mercury-arc, 320
semiconductor, 385
relay(s), 430
resistance thermometer, 110
resistance welding, 127
resistivity, 107
units of, 107
rheostat(s), 116f
Richman, G., 199
Riecke, K., 183
Roentgen, W., 295
rotor, 386
squirrel-cage, 410
rule,
left-hand, 283ff, 295, 415
right-hand screw, 259, 266ff
Volta, 153ff, 176
Seebeck, T., 176
self-induction, 353ff
emf, 354, 356
semiconductor(s), 16, 226
p -type, 229ff
semiconductor photocell(s), 238
short-circuiting, 132f
shunt, 121 f
slip ring(s), 386
stator, 386
Stewart, T., 184
superconductivity, 11 Iff
surface charge density, 72
theory,
Ampere, 255f
electron, 21
of ferromagnetism, 338ff
of molecular magnetism, 330f
thermionic emission, 191
thermistor(s), 228
thermocouple(s), 176ff
as generators, 178
as thermometers, 179f
thermoelectric radiometer, 181
thermoelectromotive force, 176
thermopile(s), 181, 229
Tolman, R., 184
torque, 257
transformation ratio, 375
transformer(s), 373ff
efficiency of, 377
transistor(s), 238
triode, 221 ff
volt, 52
Volta, A., 152f, 155
voltage,
breakdown, 197
distribution in circuit, 117
distribution in current-carrying
conductor, 102ff
voltmeter(s), 119f, 352f
resistance of, 121
watt, 125
Weber, W.E., 316
Wimshurst machine, 152
work of electric current, 48ff, 124
units of, 124
work function, 188f, 218
Mir Publishers would be grateful for your comments on the content,
translation and design of this book. We would also be pleased to receive
any other suggestions you may wish to make.
Our address is:
USSR Mir Publishers of Moscow publishes
Soviet scientific and technical
literature in twenty five languages
including all those most widely used.
Titles include textbooks for higher
technical and vocational schools,
literature on the natural sciences
and medicine, popular science and
science fiction. The contributors to
Mir Publishers' list are leading
Soviet scientists and engineers from
all fields of science and technology.
Skilled translators provide a high
standard of translation from the
original Russian. Many of the titles
already issued by Mir Publishers
have been adopted as textbooks
and manuals at educational
establishments in India, France,
Cuba, Syria, Brazil, and many other
countries.
Mir Publishers' books in foreign
languages can be purchased or
ordered through booksellers in your
country dealing with V/O
"Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga".
Edited by Landsberg
CONTENTS
Volume 1
Mechanics. Heat. Molecular Physics
Kinematics. Dynamics. Statics. Work and Energy. Curvilinear Motion. Motion
in Noninertial Reference Systems and inertial Forces. Hydrostatics.
Aerostatics. Fluid Dynamics. Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids.
Work. Heat. Law of Energy Conservation. Molecular Theory. Properties of
Gases. Properties of Liquids. Properties of Solids. Transition from Solid to
Liquid State. Elasticity and Strength. Properties of Vapours. Physics of the
Atmosphere. Heat Engines.
Volume 2
Electricity and Magnetism
Electric Charges. Electric Field. Direct Current. Thermal Effect of Current.
Electric Current in Electrolytes. Chemical and Thermal Generators. Electric
Current in Metals. Electric Current in Gases. Electric Current in
Semiconductors. Basic Magnetic Phenomena. Magnetic Field. Magnetic
Field of Current. Magnetic Field of the Earth. Forces Acting on CurrentCarrying Conductors in Magnetic Field. Electromagnetic Induction. Magnetic
Properties of Bodies. Alternating Current. Electric Machines: Generators,
Motors and Electromagnets.
Volume 3
Oscillations and Waves. Optics. Atomic and Nuclear Physics
Basic Concepts. Mechanical Vibrations. Acoustic Vibrations. Electric
Oscillations. Wave Phenomena. Interference of Waves. Electromagnetic
Waves. Light Phenomena: General. Photometry and Lighting Engineering.
Basic Laws of Geometrical Optics. Application of Reflection and Refraction
of Light to Image Formation. Optical Systems and Errors. Optical
Instruments. Interference of Light. Diffraction of Light. Physical Principles of
Optical Holography. Polarization of Light. Transverse Nature of Lightwaves.
Electromagnetic Spectrum. Velocity of Light. Dispersion of Light and Colours
of Bodies. Spectra and Spectral Regularities. Effects of Light. Atomic
Structure. Radioactivity. Atomic Nuclei and Nuclear Power. Elementary
Particles. New Achievements in Elementary Particle Physics.
ISBN 5-03-000225-1
ISBN 5-03-000223-5
